
============================================================
FILE: goldfarb2020digital.pdf
============================================================
Journal of Economic Literature 2019, 57(1), 3–43
https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452
3
1.  What Is Digital Economics?
D
igital technology is the representation 
of information in bits. This reduces the 
cost of storage, computation, and transmis-
sion of data. Research on digital economics 
examines whether and how digital technol-
ogy changes economic activity. 
Understanding the effects of digital tech-
nology does not require fundamentally new 
economic theory. However, it requires a dif-
ferent emphasis. Studying digital economics 
starts with the question of “what is differ-
ent?” What is easier to do when information 
is represented by bits rather than atoms? 
Digital technology often means that costs 
may constrain economic actions. Therefore, 
digital economics explores how standard 
economic models change as certain costs 
fall substantially and perhaps approach zero. 
We emphasize how this shift in costs can be 
divided into five types: 
	
(i)	 Lower search costs 
	
(ii)	 Lower replication costs 
	 (iii)	 Lower transportation costs 
	 (iv)	 Lower tracking costs 
	
(v)	 Lower verification costs  
Search costs are lower in digital environ-
ments, enlarging the potential scope and 
quality of search. Digital goods can be rep-
licated at zero cost, meaning they are often 
­non-rival. The role of geographic distance 
changes as the cost of transportation for dig-
ital goods and information is approximately 
zero. Digital technologies make it easy to 
track any one individual’s behavior. Last, dig-
ital verification can make it easier to certify 
the reputation and trustworthiness of any 
one individual, firm, or organization in the 
Digital Economics†
Avi Goldfarb and Catherine Tucker*
Digital technology is the representation of information in bits. This technology has 
reduced the cost of storage, computation, and transmission of data. Research on digital 
economics examines whether and how digital technology changes economic activity. 
In this review, we emphasize the reduction in five distinct economic costs associated 
with digital economic activity: search costs, replication costs, transportation costs, 
tracking costs, and verification costs. (JEL D24, D83, L86, O33, R41)
* Goldfarb: University of Toronto and NBER. Tucker: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of 
Management and NBER. We thank Andrey Fradkin and 
Kristina McElheran for helpful comments. We are grate-
ful to the Sloan Foundation for its support of the NBER 
Digitization Initiative, which built the research community 
around which this review is based.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452 to visit the 
article page and view author disclosure statement(s).

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
4
digital economy. Each of these cost changes 
draws on a different set of ­well-established 
economic models, primarily search, ­non-rival 
goods, transportation cost, price discrimina-
tion, and reputation models. 
Early research tested straightforward mod-
els of lower costs. For example, the search 
literature of the late 1990s and early 2000s 
built directly on earlier models by Diamond 
(1971) and Varian (1980). As we detail below, 
empirical work emerged that found some 
inconsistencies with the simple models, and 
so richer models and empirical analysis of the 
cost reductions developed to take account of 
the subtleties of the digital context. 
Other authors have also emphasized the 
role of lower costs for digital economics 
(e.g., Shapiro and Varian 1998; Borenstein 
and Saloner 2001; and Smith, Bailey, and 
Brynjolfsson 2001). Ellison and Ellison 
(2005) discuss the implications of these lower 
search and transportation costs for indus-
trial organization with respect to increasing 
returns, distance, and ­two-sided markets. 
Since their article, the digital ­economics liter-
ature has grown to contribute to the econom-
ics of crime, the economics of public goods, 
organizational economics, finance, urban 
economics, labor economics, development 
economics, health economics, political econ-
omy, media economics, public finance, and 
international economics. In this sense, we 
view digital economics as a way of thinking 
that touches many fields of economics. 
In addition to applying across many fields, 
these shifts in costs have transformed many 
aspects of the economy. After providing a brief 
history of digital technology and the Internet, 
we discuss each of the cost changes associated 
with digitization. In each section, we empha-
size the key research questions that have 
driven the area and how they have evolved, 
and relate them to policy where applicable. 
We begin with a discussion of the effect 
of lower search costs, defined as the costs of 
looking for information. Lower search costs 
affect prices and price dispersion. They affect 
product variety and media availability. They 
change matches in a variety of settings, from 
labor markets to dating. They have led to an 
increase in the prevalence of ­platform-based 
businesses, and affected the organization of 
some firms. 
We next turn to zero replication costs, which 
also affect pricing decisions including the 
decision to provide a good for free. This has 
enabled an increase in the provision of public 
goods such as Wikipedia, raising a number of 
new questions about the motivations for pro-
viding such goods. Zero replication costs cre-
ate challenges with respect to excludability. 
Copyright can enforce excludability by using 
the law to overcome the ­non-rival nature of 
the technology. Consequently, copyright has 
become increasingly important to a variety of 
businesses and a core policy challenge related 
to digitization. 
Because the cost of transporting infor-
mation stored in bits is near zero, this has 
changed the role of ­place-based constraints 
on economic activity, whether due to costs of 
physical transportation or policy. Digitization 
changes the ways governments can control 
the flow of information, from advertising 
restrictions to media blackouts. 
We then turn to examine a more recent 
literature that has identified two other cost 
changes: Tracking and verification costs. 
Tracking costs are the costs associated with 
connecting an individual person or firm with 
information about them. Low tracking costs 
enable novel forms of price discrimination as 
well as new ways to targeting advertising and 
other information. At the same time, better 
tracking has made privacy a key issue, gen-
erating a great deal of research and policy 
discussion. 
We conclude the discussion of cost 
changes by detailing changes in verification 
costs. The rise of online reputation sys-
tems has facilitated trust and created new 
­markets. At the same time, such systems are 

5
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
­imperfect, and can serve as platforms for 
fraud or discrimination. 
We finish by discussing the consequences 
of digitization for countries, regions, firms, 
and individuals. Digitization has affected 
productivity, trade, the economic role of cit-
ies, domestic and international outsourcing, 
consumer surplus, and how people spend 
their leisure time. 
2.  Digital Technology: A Brief History
The history of modern computing begins 
not with the Internet, but in 1945 with the 
commercialization of technologies developed 
during World War II (Ceruzzi 2003). These 
first machines focused on rapid calculation 
with little capacity for storing and retrieving 
information. By the early 1950s, magnetic 
core memories enabled efficient digital infor-
mation storage and perhaps the first real 
­non-arithmetical benefit of representing 
information in bits emerged: the lower mar-
ginal cost of reproducing information. Over 
time, storage technology, software, and hard-
ware improved so that information processing 
and reproduction became widespread. The 
software and hardware industries grew rap-
idly (Ceruzzi 2003 and Campbell-Kelly 2004). 
Limited 
communication 
between 
computers limited their effect on the 
economy. It was with the rise of the 
Internet—and with it, ­low-cost, commer-
cial, ­computer-to-computer communica-
tion—that the representation of information 
in bits began to have a measurable effect 
on multiple markets. This rise was built on 
key inventions developed through US mili-
tary funding in the 1960s and 1970s (Hafner 
and Lyon 1996 and Greenstein 2015). For 
example, the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) funded the inven-
tion of packet switching, which breaks down 
a long message into shorter messages that 
can be sent through the network and then 
reassembled upon receipt. ­DARPA-funded 
researchers also developed the particu-
lar packet-switching standards that define 
Internet communication: the Transmission 
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/
IP). The National Science Foundation (NSF) 
began managing a network using that proto-
col in the 1980s, building a reliable infra-
structure that was relatively easy to adopt but 
also restricted to researchers. 
Privatization occurred between 1990 and 
1995, leading to the modern commercial 
Internet. The commercial Internet diffused 
quickly, with universities playing a key role 
in the diffusion process (Goldfarb 2006). 
There was ­near-universal availability and 
widespread adoption in the United States 
by 2000 (Greenstein 2000).1 Over time, new 
technologies have been layered on top of 
the basic TCP/­IP-based Internet, including 
browsers, search engines, online shopping, 
social networks, mobile communications 
protocols, security standards, customer rela-
tionship management systems, and many 
others. These technologies and others have 
enabled increased collection and use of data. 
During this process, there has been an 
open question of who should control vari-
ous aspects of commercial Internet activity, 
given this historical context of decentral-
ization. Standards are often agreed upon 
through committees with representatives 
from industry and academia. Such standards 
have an influence on which technologies 
are widely adopted (Rysman and Simcoe 
2008). Therefore, standards setting creates 
winners and losers. Simcoe (2012) examines 
the incentives in standards development for 
one such standard-setting organization, the 
Internet Engineering Task Force, demon-
strating that the commercialization of the 
Internet slowed standards development due 
1 This rapid speed of diffusion proved useful for identi-
fication in the empirical papers examining the effect of the 
Internet on regions, firms, and individuals that we discuss 
in the penultimate section. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
6
to competing commercial interests. Given 
their importance, control of hardware and 
software standards has been controversial. 
Echoing this question of control, the 
earlier literature on the economics of the 
Internet focused on pricing the sending of 
information and how it varies with intercon-
nection, competition, and the nature of the 
content (­MacKie-Mason and Varian 1994). 
In other words, there is a question about 
the role of Internet service providers in con-
trolling access. Laffont et al. (2003) empha-
sized how the need for interconnection can 
affect prices and welfare. This literature 
emphasized network effects and the chal-
lenges of interconnection (Cremer, Rey, and 
Tirole 2000; Besen et al. 2001; Laffont et al. 
2001; and Caillaud and Jullien 2003). 
As data transmission became a key aspect 
of digital technology, the question of net 
neutrality has become a central research 
and policy focus. Net neutrality means that 
an Internet service provider should treat all 
data in the same way; regardless of the con-
tent provider or content, companies cannot 
pay an Internet service provider to have 
faster speeds. The net neutrality debate asks 
whether Internet service providers should 
exercise control over content. Put differently, 
net neutrality is the norm that Netflix pays the 
same to send a gigabyte of data to one of their 
customers as a small startup would pay to 
send data to the same customer. Internet ser-
vices have had a historic norm of net neutral-
ity, though this has been challenged in recent 
years by Internet service providers and policy 
makers in the United States and globally. The 
net neutrality literature therefore empha-
sizes the role of the connection intermediary 
(Economides and Hermalin 2012; Bourreau, 
Kourandi, and Valletti 2015; Choi, Jeon, and 
Kim 2015; and Goetz 2017). As shown by Lee 
and Wu (2009) and Greenstein, Peitz, and 
Valletti (2016), the particulars of the model 
matter, and the costs and benefits of net neu-
trality depend on the specific setting. 
Therefore, a key theme in the history of 
digital technology is a tension between open-
ness and control. As we discuss below, this 
tension is at the center of much of the digital 
policy literature with respect to copyright, 
privacy, and discrimination. 
3.  Reduction in Search Costs
Search costs are the costs of looking for 
information. Every information-gathering 
activity therefore involves search costs. The 
basic idea with respect to digital economic 
activity is that it is easier to find and compare 
information about potential economic trans-
actions online than offline. 
At the beginning of the commercial 
Internet, there was much discussion among 
economics researchers around how a dra-
matic reduction in search costs might trans-
form the economy by reducing prices, price 
dispersion, unemployment, vacancies, and 
inventories. Alan Greenspan argued that the 
information and communications technology 
(ICT) revolution would reduce the severity 
of business cycles.2 The consequences of low 
search costs were discussed in financial mar-
kets (Barber and Odean 2001), labor markets 
(Autor 2001), and retail markets (Borenstein 
and Saloner 2001 and Bakos 2001). The ideas 
in these papers have their roots in the early 
search literature, which modeled search 
costs as the costs of gathering information 
(Stigler 1961, Diamond 1971, and Varian 
1980). Reflecting this early focus and solid 
base of economic understanding, the liter-
ature on the effects of lower digital search 
costs is more established than the other parts 
of the digital economics literature. 
2 “Information technology has doubtless enhanced 
the stability of business operations,” Federal Reserve 
Chairman Alan Greenspan, February 26, 1997, testimony 
before Congress. https://www.federalreserve.gov/board-
docs/hh/1997/february/testimony.htm. 

7
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
3.1	 Are Prices and Price Dispersion Lower 
Online?
Low search costs make it easier for con-
sumers to compare prices, putting downward 
pressure on prices for similar products. This 
should reduce both prices and price disper-
sion. Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000) compare 
prices of books and CDs at four ­Internet-only 
retailers, four offline retailers, and four 
“hybrid” retailers who had both online and 
offline stores. They identified twenty books 
and twenty CDs, half of which were best-
sellers and half of which were randomly 
selected among titles popular enough to be 
sold in most offline stores. They showed that 
online prices for these items were substan-
tially lower than offline prices. Relatively low 
online prices have been shown in a variety of 
other settings, including insurance (Brown 
and Goolsbee 2002), automotive products 
(Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and ­Silva-Risso 
2001), and airlines (Orlov 2011). 
However, though prices may be lower, 
substantial 
price 
dispersion 
remains. 
Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000) show this 
in their ­online–offline retail study. Baye, 
Morgan, and Scholten (2004) use evidence 
from thousands of products and prices 
to document large and persistent online 
price dispersion. Orlov (2011) finds that 
the Internet increases the intrafirm disper-
sion of airline prices, but had no effect on 
interfirm price dispersion. By contrast, the 
development economics literature measur-
ing the effect of mobile phones on commod-
ity prices suggests that lower search costs 
reduced price dispersion (Jensen 2007; Aker 
2010; and Parker, Ramdas, and Savva 2016). 
Given evidence of the persistence of price 
dispersion online, research turned to explore 
why price dispersion does not disappear. Of 
course comparison of online products does 
not always compare ­apples to apples. In com-
paring book prices, the book may be the same, 
but the retailer is different. Different retailers 
offer different quality, shopping experiences, 
and shipping policies. Firms with higher qual-
ity may develop stronger brands and there-
fore command higher prices (Waldfogel and 
Chen 2006). 
Firms selling products can also shape the 
search process. When consumers search, they 
assess multiple dimensions of information: 
price, quality, reputation, shipping fees, time 
to delivery, color, etc. Lynch and Ariely (2000) 
demonstrate this for online wine purchasing 
in a laboratory. If price was available on the 
first page, consumers focused on price. If con-
sumers needed to click further to learn the 
price, other attributes became more import-
ant for purchase decisions. Fradkin (2017) 
shows that the details of the search process 
matter in the context of short-term accommo-
dation platform Airbnb. Structural estimates 
of the cost of an extra click in the consumer 
search process suggest they are larger than 
might be supposed (Honka 2014 and De Los 
Santos, Hortacsu, and Wildenbeest 2012). 
This means that consumers stop searching 
sooner than predicted by models that assume 
search costs close to zero. 
In the presence of search costs, and mul-
tiple dimensions of information, firms can 
partly choose which information has the low-
est search costs. Ellison and Ellison (2009a) 
demonstrate that computer memory chip 
retailers attract customers with low prices 
at an online price comparison website, and 
then show customers other (typically higher 
quality and higher margin) products once 
they arrive. Using data from eBay, Dinerstein 
et al. (2018) emphasizes how the design of 
the search algorithm on eBay affects mark-
ups charged by eBay sellers. More directly, 
Hossain and Morgan (2006) show that online 
sellers often hide shipping fees until the final 
purchase page. Blake et al. (2018) shows a 
similar phenomenon in the information 
revealed in ticket prices at an online ticket 
platform. 
Therefore, while prices have fallen, 
price dispersion has persisted. The initial 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
8
­predictions of low price dispersion missed 
the point that search costs are endogenous, 
and so firms can manipulate the search pro-
cess in order to sustain higher margins and 
prices. 
3.2	 How Do Low Search Costs Affect 
Variety?
Low search costs may mean that it is easier 
to find rare and niche products (Yang 2013). 
In this case, digital search might lead to an 
increase in the proportion of sales going to 
products that are relatively rarely purchased, 
a phenomenon dubbed “the long tail” by 
Anderson (2006). Using data from a retailer 
with both online and offline channels, 
Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Simester (2011) doc-
ument that the variety of products available, 
and purchased, online is higher than offline. 
Low search costs may facilitate discovery of 
relatively unknown products (Zhang 2018).3 
Low search costs could also generate 
superstar effects (Rosen 1981). If there are 
vertically differentiated products and the 
marginal cost of production is zero, then 
homogeneous consumers will all agree 
which product is best and buy it. Consistent 
with this, Goldmanis et al. (2010) show that 
the Internet initially led to a relative increase 
in the number of large offline bookstores and 
travel agencies. 
­Bar-Isaac, Caruana, and Cunat (2012) 
explain how superstar and long-tail effects 
may result from a reduction in search costs. 
If products are both vertically and horizon-
tally differentiated, a reduction in search 
costs may lead to an equilibrium where the 
most popular and highest-quality products 
are produced in high enough quantity to be 
3 In addition to search costs, variety may increase 
because digital technologies can make inventory systems 
more efficient, meaning firms can hold millions of prod-
ucts, especially for digital goods that have no physical pres-
ence. People may also be less inhibited from purchasing 
nonstandard items when purchasing on a screen, rather 
than from a human (Goldfarb et al. 2015). 
sold to everyone, while niche products are 
sold through long-tail retailers. The increase 
in tails at the right and left of the distribution 
comes at the cost of products in the middle. 
The degree to which search costs generate 
more or less variety depends on the search 
process endogenously chosen by the firm. 
Recommendation engines are a key aspect 
of the online search process. Fleder and 
Hosanagar (2009) demonstrate this, show-
ing that algorithms that emphasize “people 
who bought this also bought” move the sales 
distribution toward superstars. If many peo-
ple buy Harry Potter, this recommendation 
engine will recommend Harry Potter to 
everyone else. In contrast, if the algorithm 
emphasizes “people who bought this dis-
proportionately bought,” relatively unusual 
items that demonstrate niche tastes will be 
sold. Empirically, Tucker and Zhang (2011) 
document 
that 
popularity 
information 
has asymmetrically large effects for niche 
products. 
Popularity information affects sales in 
general. Many online platforms sort items 
by popularity and feature popularity prom-
inently, reducing search costs for this type 
of information. Showing such popularity 
information affects purchase behavior not 
only in retail, but also online lending (Zhang 
and Liu 2012) and online investing (Agrawal, 
Catalini, and Goldfarb 2015). 
The effect on welfare of this change in 
variety is not obvious, and so it has been 
the subject of a rich discussion in the liter-
ature. Lower search costs that lead people 
to buy the products that more closely match 
their preferences should increase welfare. 
Consistent with this, Brynjolfsson, Hu, and 
Smith (2003) show that increased variety 
increases consumer surplus. 
At the same time, improvements in wel-
fare may be small. The increase in matching 
of products to preferences is, by definition, 
marginal. The new products offered are the 
products on the margin of being produced. 

9
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
The superstar effects may be marginal rela-
tive to the consumers who bought products 
in the middle because they were unwilling to 
pay search costs. For example, Ershov (2017) 
shows that a reduction in search costs in the 
mobile app market reduced average product 
quality. On balance, however, it also shows 
that the increase in variety led to a substan-
tial increase in overall welfare despite the 
incremental nature of the new products. 
Aguiar and Waldfogel (2016) suggest that 
this marginal argument misses the substan-
tial uncertainty about product quality for 
many information goods. In the context 
of music, they show that several songs and 
musicians that seem marginal ex ante ended 
up having substantial sales. Therefore, by 
enabling such music to get produced, digital 
markets led to a large change in the relative 
sales of products. Uncertainty in the process 
meant better and more music was created. 
A great deal of attention has focused on 
the increase in variety in consumption of 
media in particular. The Internet might also 
enable people to only read information that 
reflects their narrow viewpoint; despite the 
variety, there is no need to search widely. 
The latter idea has been emphasized by Cass 
Sunstein as an “echo chamber” (Sunstein 
2001). Consistent with the idea of wide vari-
ety available but consumption in echo cham-
bers, Greenstein and Zhu (2012) examine 
the bias of Wikipedia and show that, while, 
on aggregate Wikipedia has become less 
politically biased (toward Democrats) over 
time, the bias of articles has not changed 
much. Instead, the political bias has mainly 
dropped because of the arrival of new, rela-
tively ­right-wing articles. 
By contrast, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) 
show that Internet media consumption is 
more varied than offline media consumption. 
Therefore, in this context, low search costs 
lead to increased variety. Boxell, Gentzkow, 
and Shapiro (2017) argues that the Internet 
is unlikely to be responsible for increased 
polarization of digital content because the 
increase in polarization is largest for demo-
graphic groups with the least Internet usage. 
Polarized media may be less concentrated, 
generating incentives for niche sources to 
intentionally mislead. Allcott and Gentzkow 
(2017) show that false news stories about the 
2016 presidential election were shared tens 
of millions of times, though they demon-
strate the fake news was unlikely to have 
changed the election outcome. Long before 
the attention to fake news in the 2016 elec-
tion, Antweiler and Frank (2004) examined 
how anonymous, and potentially misleading, 
online investing advice affects stock prices. 
Low search costs—in the absence of a reli-
able quality filter—meant that this informa-
tion could be more easily found and shared. 
Low online search costs have also trans-
formed the way academic research is con-
sumed. McCabe and Snyder (2015) show 
that JSTOR led to an increase in citations 
of included articles at the expense of others. 
Search costs fell, but because they fell more 
for some articles than others, it changed the 
nature of attention to specific articles and 
ideas. More starkly, Ellison (2011) argues 
that peer review may be in decline because 
of low online search costs. In particular, he 
shows that ­high-profile researchers do not 
need to rely on academic journals to dissem-
inate their ideas. They can post online and 
people will find their work. In other words, 
similar to the superstar effect in products, 
low search costs combined with thousands 
of research articles benefit the superstar 
researchers. 
3.3	 How Do Low Search Costs Affect 
Matching?
Reduced search costs facilitate exchange 
more generally, often enabled by large dig-
ital platforms. Dana and Orlov (2014) show 
that airlines are better able to fill to ­capacity. 
Ellison et al. (2014) show that online buy-
ers are better able to find the specific books 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
10
they want. Kroft and Pope (2014) find online 
search through Craigslist decreased rental 
apartment and home vacancies (though 
they measure no effect on unemploy-
ment). Anenberg and Kung (2015) show 
that online search enabled the rise of a 
market for ­truck-based mobile restaurants 
(“food trucks”). To the extent that the liter-
ature emphasizing matching is distinct from 
search, the matching literature emphasizes 
that both sides of the market engage in the 
search process. 
Related to the above ideas, low search 
costs are likely to increase the quality of 
matches between buyers and sellers, firms 
and workers, etc. The labor economics lit-
erature has emphasized that the Internet 
should reduce unemployment and vacancies. 
Kuhn and Skuterud (2004) find no effect of 
Internet job search on employment. Kuhn 
and Mansour (2014) revisit the analysis sev-
eral years later with updated data and find 
that individuals that used the Internet in job 
search were indeed more likely to match to 
an employer. 
The reduced costs of search have led to the 
development of online “peer-to-peer” plat-
forms dedicated to facilitating matching. The 
variety of such online matching markets is 
extraordinary: workers and firms, buyers and 
sellers, investors and entrepreneurs, vacant 
rooms and travelers, charities and donors, 
dog walkers and dog owners, etc. Several of 
these markets have been dubbed the “shar-
ing economy” because people are able to use 
unused objects or skills better. Most “sharing 
economy” platforms are not sharing in the 
sense learned by kindergarteners: custom-
ers typically pay for the “shared” services. 
Horton and Zeckhauser (2016) emphasize 
that many of these markets are driven by 
an unused capacity for durable goods. Low 
search costs enable such unused capacity to 
be filled more efficiently. 
In a review of the ­peer-to-peer mar-
kets literature, Einav et al. (2018) note that 
much of the research takes a market design 
­perspective. For example, Cullen and 
Farronato (2016) examine an online mar-
ketplace that matches buyers and sellers of 
domestic tasks, such as cleaning, moving, 
and simple home repair. They emphasize the 
challenges in growing both the demand and 
supply sides with respect to variation in the 
quantity of buyers and sellers over time, econ-
omies of scale in matching, and geographic 
density. A key result is that demand fluctua-
tions in this ­two-sided market lead to changes 
in quantity supplied rather than changes in 
prices. Similarly, Hall, Kendrick, and Nosko 
(2016), Farronato and Fradkin (2018), and 
Zervas, Proserpio, and Byers (2017) also show 
that the responsiveness in quantity supplied 
to changes in demand conditions is a key 
aspect of ­peer-to-peer platforms (specifically, 
Uber and Airbnb). Low search costs provide 
market demand information that enables sup-
ply to enter the market when needed. 
3.4	 Why Are Digital ­Platform-based 
Businesses So Prevalent?
Platforms 
are 
intermediaries 
that 
enable exchange between other players. 
Digitization has led to an increase in the 
prevalence of platform businesses, even 
beyond the ­peer-to-peer platforms discussed 
above. Most of the major technology firms 
can be seen as ­platform-based businesses. 
For example, Apple provides hardware and 
software platforms for others to build appli-
cations around. Google provides platforms 
for bringing together advertisers and poten-
tial buyers. 
As highlighted in Jullien (2012), there are 
two main reasons digital markets give rise to 
platforms. First, platforms facilitate match-
ing. In particular, as in the sharing economy 
platforms, they provide a structure that can 
take advantage of low search costs to create 
efficient matches. Often platforms serve as 
intermediaries between buyers and sellers, as 
highlighted in Nocke, Peitz, and Stahl (2007) 

11
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
and Jullien (2012). In the context of a central 
role of matching, a rich theory literature has 
arisen that examines competition and pricing 
strategy in such platform businesses, with an 
emphasis on the importance of indirect net-
work effects (for example Baye and Morgan 
2001, Caillaud and Jullien 2003, Weyl 2010, 
Hagiu and Jullien 2011, and de Corniere 
2016). 
Second, platforms increase the efficiency 
of trade. They do this through lower search 
costs as well as other aspects of digitization 
that we discuss below: low reproduction and 
verification costs. Hagiu (2012) emphasizes 
how software platforms enable application 
providers to serve a large number of cus-
tomers quickly, with the only requirement 
that the application serve some particular 
customer need, reproduce at zero cost, and 
rely on the platform and the other applica-
tions to serve other needs. Interoperability 
is therefore a key aspect of platforms. There 
is a large literature on the topic, as reviewed 
in Farrell and Simcoe (2012). A key contri-
bution of this literature is the emphasis on 
the strategic nature of decisions on interop-
erability and standards (Rysman and Simcoe 
2008 and Simcoe 2012). A related set of 
questions examines whether market partic-
ipants will “­multi-home” and use multiple 
platforms (Rochet and Tirole 2003, Rysman 
2007, Halaburda and Yehezkel 2013). 
3.5	 How Do Low Search Costs Affect the 
Organization of the Firm?
­Lucking-Reiley and Spulber (2001) discuss 
several hypotheses with respect to the effect 
of the Internet on firm structure in terms of 
the role of online intermediaries and vertical 
integration. This literature emphasizes infor-
mation flow generally, in which search is one 
key type of information flow. Garicano (2000) 
shows that ­low-cost digital information flow 
could increase ­centralization by enabling 
headquarters, and organizational leaders, 
to understand better what is happening at a 
­distance. On the other hand, Garicano (2000) 
also shows that ­low-cost communication 
could decrease centralization by enabling 
­front-line employees to access information 
previously only available to senior employ-
ees at headquarters. A variety of papers have 
explored nuances in this trade-off within 
organizations, emphasizing the importance 
of the particular technology studied. 
Bloom et al. (2014) test this theory directly, 
using data on European and American 
manufacturing firms to show that informa-
tion technology is a centralizing force and 
communication technology is a decentral-
izing force. Acemoglu et al. (2007) also dis-
cuss the decentralizing role of information 
technology. For example, Forman and van 
Zeebroeck (2012) shows that digital commu-
nication increases in research collaboration 
across establishments within an organization. 
Baker and Hubbard (2003) examines the 
effect of ­on-board computers on asset own-
ership in the trucking industry. They empha-
size tracking costs more than search costs 
and find that aspects of ­on-board comput-
ing that improve monitoring pushed truck-
ing firms to more ownership of trucks while 
aspects of ­on-board computing that improve 
­real-time 
location 
information 
pushed 
trucking firms to less ownership of trucks. 
Therefore, while adoption of digital tech-
nology led to improved efficiency, the effect 
on organization of the firm in equilibrium 
depends on the nature of the technology 
and how its specific features affect trade-offs 
between competing tensions at the bound-
ary of the firm. McElheran (2014) examines 
the decision to centralize or delegate IT 
adoption decisions within firms. Firms with 
a greater need for integrated processes (dig-
ital or otherwise) delegate less. Forman and 
McElheran (2013) show that this tendency is 
mitigated by the ease with which IT enables 
coordination across firms, so that disintegra-
tion of the firm boundary can be seen as an 
extreme form of delegation. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
12
In addition to the effect on the domes-
tic boundaries of the firm, the reduction in 
search costs (combined with the reduction 
in verification costs discussed below) has 
also led to an increase in international hiring 
and outsourcing. While international out-
sourcing is not a new phenomenon (Leamer 
2007), the recent rise of digital international 
labor market platforms suggests a different 
avenue for international hiring. Agrawal, 
Lacetera, and Lyons (2016) show that online 
platforms with standardized information dis-
proportionately benefit workers from devel-
oping countries. The objective information 
available online, combined with the ability to 
send the output of the work (typically infor-
mation such as data or software code) for free 
over long distance helps workers who are far 
from the buyer. Such online labor markets 
have several important challenges. Using 
data from online labor markets, Lyons (2017) 
shows that ­cross-cultural international teams 
can be less productive because of commu-
nication challenges. Relatedly, Ghani, Kerr, 
and Stanton (2014) show that employers in 
the Indian diaspora are more likely to hire 
Indians online. 
4.  The Replication Cost of Digital Goods 
Is Zero
The key shift in the production function 
is not that digital goods have a marginal cost 
of zero. Simple microeconomic models with 
zero marginal cost are not so different from 
models with positive marginal cost. The 
demand curve slopes downward and firms 
price where marginal revenue equals zero. 
Instead, a key distinction between goods 
made of atoms and goods made of bits is that 
bits are ­non-rival, meaning that they can be 
consumed by one person without reducing 
the amount or quality available to others. A 
common analogy for ­non-rival goods is that 
just as one person can start a fire without 
diminishing another’s fire, information can 
be shared without diminishing the original 
information. 
In the absence of deliberate legal or tech-
nological effort to exclude, bits can be repro-
duced by anyone—not just the producing 
firm—at near zero cost without degrading 
the quality of the initial good. As Shapiro and 
Varian (1998, p. 83) put it, the Internet can 
be seen as a “giant, out of control copying 
machine.” 
Nevertheless, the economics of zero mar-
ginal cost, ­non-rival goods can shift things in 
favor of producers, consumers, or both. In a 
static model, as marginal costs fall the poten-
tial surplus rises, and so the welfare effect 
depends on the final price and associated 
deadweight loss. The final price and dead-
weight loss depend on legal and technological 
tools for exclusion (Cornes and Sandler 1986), 
which relate to the ability to track behavior—
the subject of a later section. In this section, 
we emphasize that the underlying technology 
enables firms and governments to make a 
choice not to exclude. This can allow individ-
uals to enjoy the full benefits of the ­non-rival 
nature of ­information-based goods. 
4.1	 How Can ­Non-Rival Digital Goods Be 
Priced Profitably?
The ­non-rival nature of digital goods has 
led to questions of how to structure pric-
ing of a large variety of ­non-rival ­zero-cost 
goods, should a producer choose to charge. 
Bundling occurs when two or more products 
are sold together at a single price (Shapiro 
and Varian 1998, Choi 2012). Bundling 
models have a long history in economics. 
Stigler (1964) and Adams and Yellen (1976) 
note that a sufficient condition for price dis-
crimination benefit of bundling arises when 
consumers have negatively correlated pref-
erences. Some people may value an action 
movie at $10 and a romance at $2. Others 
may value the romance at $10 and the action 
movie at $2. Selling the bundle at $12 yields 
higher profits than selling the action and 

13
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
romance movies separately. The challenge 
for firms is to identify such negative correla-
tions in preferences to identify when bun-
dling will increase profits. 
Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1999, 2000) rec-
ognize that, under certain assumptions, with 
enough goods and independent preferences, 
this challenge is overcome. Furthermore, 
the ­non-rival nature of information goods 
means that large numbers of information 
goods can be bundled without substantially 
increasing costs. Therefore, a simple and 
useful insight on the economics of ­non-rival 
information goods is that it will sometimes 
be optimal to bundle thousands of digital 
products together. 
Chu, Leslie, and Sorensen (2011) use an 
empirical example to show that the intuition 
of Bakos (1999) applies to relatively small 
numbers of goods in the bundle. There are 
also strategic reasons to bundle because it can 
reduce competition (Carbajo, de Meza, and 
Seidmann 1990). When bundling has zero 
marginal cost, such strategic considerations 
can become particularly relevant (Carlton, 
Gans, and Waldman 2010; Choi 2012). 
Despite the extensive theory work, it is only 
recently that empirical examples of such mas-
sive bundles appeared in the literature, in the 
form of subscription services such as Netflix 
for video and Spotify and Apple Music for 
music. Aguiar and Waldfogel (2018) show that 
Spotify displaces sales but it also displaces 
“piracy,” or the downloading of music without 
permission from the copyright holder. They 
estimate that the reduction in sales and the 
increase in legal music consumption balance 
each other so that Spotify appears to be reve-
nue neutral in the ­2013–15 time period. 
4.2	 What Are the Motivations for Providing 
Digital Public Goods?
Information providers can deliberately 
decide not to exclude. It is somewhat of a 
puzzle why private actors would choose to 
create public goods. Two prominent examples 
of ­non-rival public digital goods are open-
source software and Wikipedia. Both cases 
involve a deliberate decision not to exclude, 
and applying established models is somewhat 
less straightforward than the bundling models 
highlighted in the preceding subsection. 
Lerner and Tirole (2002) ask why software 
developers would freely share their code with 
no direct payment. They emphasize two core 
benefits from open source that do not appear 
in standard models of public goods. For 
individual developers, providing high-qual-
ity open-source code is a way to signal their 
skills to potential employers. For companies, 
improving the quality of open source software 
may allow them to sell other services that 
are complementary to open-source software 
(such as hardware or consulting services) 
at a premium. Underlying these core bene-
fits is the ­non-rival nature of the code: digi-
tal distribution through the Internet means 
that (high-quality) open-source contributions 
can be widely adopted. The literature on the 
economics of open source that followed has 
largely supported their hypotheses of career 
concerns and complementarity (Johnson 
2002; Bitzer and Schroder 2005; Mustonen 
2005; Lerner, Pathak, and Tirole 2006; Henkel 
2009; Xu, Nian, and Cabral 2016). 
Wikipedia represents a different import-
ant context for the puzzle of why people 
contribute to digital public goods. Zhang and 
Zhu (2011) emphasize social benefits related 
to breadth of readership. In the context of 
Chinese-language Wikipedia, they show that 
users care about audience size, and decrease 
contributions when part of the audience is 
blocked due to Chinese government policy. 
Consistent with this idea of a social benefit, 
Aaltonen and Seiler (2016) and Kummer, 
Slivko, and Zhang (2015) together provide 
evidence for a virtuous circle in which more 
editing leads to more views and more views 
lead to more editing. Contributions are likely 
related to the interests of the contributors: 
Wikipedia leaned sharply Democratic early 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
14
on and has gradually become more neutral 
(Greenstein and Zhu 2012). 
Nagaraj (2016) suggests the potential for 
government sponsorship of digital public 
goods. He finds that open mapping infor-
mation led to a substantial increase in min-
ing activity, particularly for smaller firms 
with fewer resources. Therefore, open data 
enabled a wider set of participants to succeed. 
More generally, the ­non-rivalrous nature 
of digital technology could enable consum-
ers and workers in developing countries to 
access the same information as people in 
developed countries, conditional on having 
access to the Internet. In the context of edu-
cation, Kremer, Brannen, and Glennerster 
(2013) argue that information technology can 
improve pedagogy in the developing world. 
Underlying their argument is an emphasis 
on ­non-rival, ­non-excludable digital informa-
tion, and the public ­Internet-based posting 
of educational materials. Correspondingly, 
Acemoglu, Laibson, and List (2014) empha-
sizes that digital education will lead to a more 
equal distribution of educational resources. 
There are, however, situations in which 
welfare may decrease because of a decision 
not to exclude digital goods from wide-
spread copying. The decision not to exclude 
­non-rival goods can reduce the incentives to 
produce information goods, a subject we dis-
cuss below in the context of copyright pol-
icy. It can also create negative externalities. 
For example, Acquisti and Tucker (2014) 
show that policies that mandate “open data” 
by government may lead to data leakages 
(or privacy breaches) that affect individ-
uals’ ­welfare offline. Openness, almost by 
definition, implies a reduction in privacy. 
Relatedly, Acquisti and Gross (2009) show 
that using public data online makes it pos-
sible to predict an individual’s social security 
number. This feeds back, in general, to the 
idea that while ­non-excludability may be 
attractive in principle, it can lead to ques-
tions of appropriate data security practices 
(Gordon and Loeb 2002 and ­Gal-Or and 
Ghose 2005), especially if costly investments 
in data security also are a public good. 
While digital technology creates public 
goods, zero marginal cost of production can 
also create public bads, such as spam (Rao 
and Reiley 2012) and online crime (Moore, 
Clayton, and Anderson 2009). These have 
led to policy responses such as the US 
Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited 
Pornography And Marketing Act of 2003 
(CAN-SPAM). Another example of digital 
spam is junk telephone calls, the automation 
of which has been enabled by digital technol-
ogies. Petty (2000) and Varian, Wallenberg, 
and Woroch (2005) evaluate the role of the 
federally sponsored “Do Not Call” list in pre-
venting potentially intrusive direct sales calls 
and find positive effects. 
That said, the economics of such bads 
are relatively straightforward. In contrast, 
the more challenging policy question for 
­non-rival digital goods is whether the gov-
ernment should intervene through copyright 
policy to enforce excludability despite the 
­non-rival nature of the goods. 
4.3	 How Do Digital Markets Affect 
Copyright Policy?
As the Internet first diffused in the late 
1990s, copyrights of music (and text) were 
often ignored as people freely posted copy-
righted goods online. Because of the ­non-rival 
nature of digital information, one posted 
copyrighted item could be useful to millions 
of people, potentially replacing sales. At the 
same time, music industry revenue began to 
fall (Waldfogel 2012a) and this was widely 
blamed on changes brought by the Internet. 
Optimal enforcement of copyright has 
therefore been a key focus of the digital eco-
nomics literature. The early work focused 
on the revenue consequences of free online 
copying. This was referred to as “­file sharing” 
to those who believe it should be allowed, 
and as “piracy” by those who didn’t. The 

15
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
direct effect of free online copying of media 
is that revenues from the sale of copies of 
that media fall. At the same time, revenues 
could rise if the free copies are merely sam-
pled and consumers buy what they like (Peitz 
and Waelbroeck 2006). Revenues could also 
rise for complementary goods like live per-
formances (Mortimer, Nosko, and Sorensen 
2012). Finally, revenues could rise if the free 
copies are limited to developing markets for 
products with network effects (Takayama 
1994). Empirically, though a small num-
ber of studies have found positive effects 
(­Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf 2007), most 
studies have found that free online copy-
ing reduces revenues in music (Rob and 
Waldfogel 2006, Zentner 2006, Liebowitz 
2008, and Waldfogel 2010), in video (Rob and 
Waldfogel 2007; Liebowitz and Zentner 2012; 
Danaher, Smith, and Telang 2014b; Danaher 
and Smith 2014; and Peukert, Claussen, and 
Kretschmer 2017), and in books (Reimers 
2016). This echoes a ­non-digital historical 
literature (Li, MacGarvie, and Moser 2015; 
and MacGarvie and Moser 2015) suggesting 
a continuity between policy governing digital 
technologies and earlier policies. 
How does copyright affect the creation of 
new works? This is a more difficult research 
question, as it requires some attempt to 
measure counterfactual quality and quan-
tity of goods had copyright law not existed 
(Varian 2005; Waldfogel 2012b; and Danaher, 
Smith, and Telang 2014b). Waldfogel (2012a) 
addresses this challenge using two measures 
of music quality: historical “best albums” lists 
and usage information over time. In both 
cases, he shows that the quality of music 
began to decline in the early 1990s and 
stopped declining after the arrival of free 
online copying in 1999. Why did quality rise 
despite declining revenue? He argues that 
simultaneously with the decline in revenue 
came a decline in the cost of producing and 
distributing music. Digitization affected the 
supply side as well as the demand side, and 
so quality rose. Results are similar in ­movies 
(Waldfogel 2016) and books (Waldfogel and 
Reimers 2015). This contrasts with the eco-
nomic history literature, which suggested that 
copyright alone could increase the quality of 
creative output (Giorcelli and Moser 2016). 
In addition to affecting incentives to inno-
vate, digital challenges to copyright protec-
tion may affect incentives to build on prior 
work. Williams (2013) demonstrates this 
point in a different intellectual property 
context and shows that intellectual property 
protections limit ­follow-on innovation in 
gene sequencing. Heald (2009) shows that 
copyrighted music is less used in the movies 
than ­non-copyrighted music. Nagaraj (2018) 
shows that copyright protection of old sports 
magazines reduces the quality of Wikipedia 
pages decades later. This phenomenon is 
not unique to the digital context. Biasi and 
Moser (2018) show that eliminating copy-
rights of German books during World War II 
led to a substantial increase in US scientific 
output, measured by PhDs in mathematics 
and patents that cited the German books. 
Another challenge for copyright policy 
driven by the shift in costs of replication is that 
it has made it easier for other firms to repli-
cate digital content and attempt to aggregate 
it. This practice has been particularly preva-
lent in the news media, where policy makers 
have been encouraged to take action to pro-
tect the interests of the newspapers that actu-
ally originated this news content. However, 
in general the work in economics that has 
evaluated the effect of these aggregators has 
been to emphasize that such aggregation pro-
motes more exploration, rather than neces-
sarily cannibalizing content (Calzada and Gil 
forthcoming; Chiou and Tucker 2017; Athey, 
Mobius, and Pal 2017). 
Overall, copyright law is more import-
ant in digital markets because goods can be 
copied at zero cost. Stricter enforcement of 
copyright appears to increase revenue to the 
copyright holder, increase some incentives 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
16
by potential copyright holders to innovate, 
but reduce incentives by others to build 
on copyrighted work. Nevertheless, the 
literature also shows that, despite ease of 
copying, digitization has not killed creative 
industries because production and distribu-
tion costs have fallen and because the tech-
nology has caught up to facilitate copyright 
enforcement. 
5.  Lower Transportation Costs
Related to replication being costless, the 
cost of transporting information stored in 
bits over the Internet is near zero.4 Put dif-
ferently, the cost of distribution for digital 
goods approaches zero and the difference in 
the cost of nearby and distant communica-
tion approaches zero. 
In addition, digital purchasing technol-
ogies have reduced transportation costs. 
Consumers buy physical goods online, partic-
ularly when offline purchasing is costly or dif-
ficult (Goolsbee 2000; Forman, Ghose, and 
Goldfarb 2009; and Brynjolfsson, Hu, and 
Rahman 2009). Furthermore, Pozzi (2013) 
shows that consumers also use online shop-
ping to overcome the transportation costs of 
carrying things from the store. In this way, the 
Internet facilitates stockpiling, allowing peo-
ple to buy in bulk when a discount appears 
because delivery means there is no need to 
carry the large quantity of items purchased. 
Therefore, for information, digital goods, 
and physical goods, transportation costs are 
lower online. 
4 While transportation costs could be positive and even 
high due to network congestion, in practice this has not 
been an issue. Early on, such network congestion was a 
key focus of the literature. For example, one of the first 
volumes on Internet economics, Mcknight and Bailey 
(1998), has several articles on congestion pricing. This 
early literature on backbone competition and congestion 
ended up influencing our understanding of the economics 
of net neutrality discussed above (Cremer, Rey, and Tirole 
2000; Laffont et al. 2001; Besen et al. 2001; and Laffont 
et al. 2003). 
5.1	 Does Distance Still Matter If 
Transportation Costs Are Near Zero?
Low transportation costs for information 
mean that the cost of distribution for digital 
goods approaches zero and the difference in 
cost of nearby and distant communication 
approaches zero. 
The potential implications of low transpor-
tation costs have been explored in the popular 
press. Cairncross (1997) suggests that this fall 
in the costs of transporting information would 
lead to a “death of distance.” Isolated indi-
viduals and companies would be able to plug 
into the global economy. Rural consumers 
would benefit by having access to the same 
set of digital products and services as every-
one else. There would be a global diffusion of 
knowledge. Friedman (2005) identifies sev-
eral of the same themes in predicting a “flat 
world,” in which businesses anywhere could 
plug into the global supply chain and produce. 
Being in the United States would not confer 
a meaningful advantage relative to India. 
Both Cairncross and Friedman suggested the 
potential arrival of a global culture, in which 
everyone everywhere would consume the 
same information, an idea with its roots in 
McLuhan (1964). This idea is implicit in the 
trade model of Krugman (1979): countries 
consume the same goods as transport costs 
approach zero. Rosenblat and Mobius (2004) 
formalize some of these ideas in a different 
context, using a network model of collabora-
tion in which long distance collaboration rises 
but coauthor similarity in other dimensions 
(such as field of research) also rises. 
A less extreme question than “Is distance 
dead?” is “Does distance matter more or less 
than it used to?” The most definitive answer 
to that question comes from Lendle et al. 
(2016). They compare ­cross-border sales 
on eBay with international trade data. They 
demonstrate that, while distance predicts 
both online and offline trade flows, distance 
matters substantially less on eBay. 

17
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
The digital economic literature has empha-
sized what factors influence the extent to 
which distance still matters. 
As Lemley (2003) notes, “No one is ‘in’ 
cyberspace” (p. 523). Therefore, offline 
options matter. Balasubramanian (1998) 
examines the importance of offline options 
using a circular city/Salop (1979) model with 
the cost of using the direct retailer as con-
stant for all locations, but the cost of using the 
stores located around the circle dependent on 
transportation costs. The model shows that 
the benefit of a direct (online) retailer will be 
largest for those who live far from an offline 
retailer. Forman, Ghose, and Wiesenfeld 
(2008) provide evidence to support this 
model, demonstrating that when a Walmart or 
Barnes & Noble opens offline, people substi-
tute away from purchasing books on Amazon. 
A number of other studies also demonstrate 
how offline retail affects online purchasing. 
Related models include Loginova (2009) and 
Dinlersoz and Pereira (2007), which examine 
the role of loyalty to the offline store in driv-
ing the more price sensitive customers online. 
Empirically, Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Rahman 
(2009) show that online sales at a women’s 
clothing retailer are lower from places with 
many offline women’s clothing stores. This 
effect is driven by the more popular prod-
ucts that are likely to be available in a typical 
offline store. Choi and Bell (2011) shows that 
online sales of niche diaper brands are higher 
in places where they are unlikely to be avail-
able offline. Goolsbee (2001), Prince (2007), 
and ­Duch-Brown et al. (2017) all show sub-
stitution between online and offline sales 
of personal computers. Gentzkow (2007) 
demonstrates 
substitution 
between 
the 
online and offline news in Washington DC. 
Seamans and Zhu (2014) and Goldfarb and 
Tucker (2011a, 2011d) demonstrate substitu-
tion between online and offline advertising. 
Gertner and Stillman (2001) show how chan-
nel conflict interacts with vertical integration 
and show that vertically integrated apparel 
retailers went online first. In their review 
of the literature on ­online–offline compe-
tition, Lieber and Syverson (2012) provide 
some additional evidence that offline options 
affect online purchasing. Similarly, in the 
digital media context, evidence suggests that 
online media consumption substitutes for, 
and is replacing, offline media consumption 
(Wallsten 2013 and Gentzkow 2007). 
In addition to the offline option, the fact 
that tastes are spatially correlated also mat-
ters for the persistent role of distance. Blum 
and Goldfarb (2006) examine the interna-
tional Internet surfing behavior of about 
2,600 American Internet users, and demon-
strate that Internet surfing behavior is con-
sistent with the ­well-established empirical 
finding in the trade literature that bilateral 
trade decreases with distance (Overman, 
Redding, and Venables 2003; Anderson and 
van Wincoop 2004; and Disdier and Head 
2008). In other words, even for a product 
with zero shipping costs (visiting websites), 
people are more likely to visit websites from 
nearby countries than from faraway coun-
tries. This relationship between distance 
and website visits is much higher in taste-de-
pendent categories (and loses statistical 
significance in the ­non-taste-dependent cat-
egories). Distance matters because it prox-
ies for taste similarity. Alaveras and Martens 
(2015) replicates this core result using much 
richer data on website visits by users in a large 
number of countries. Sinai and Waldfogel 
(2004) also shows that highly populated areas 
produce more content, and that because 
tastes are spatially correlated in the sense 
that people are more likely to consume local 
media than distant media, people in highly 
populated areas are particularly likely to go 
online. This geographically specific nature 
of tastes is also reflected in the consumption 
of digital goods such as music (Ferreira and 
Waldfogel 2013) and content (Gandal 2006). 
Quan and Williams (2018) demonstrate that 
accounting for spatial correlation in tastes 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
18
reduces the estimated ­consumer surplus 
from increased online variety by 30 percent. 
In addition to offline choices and spa-
tially correlated tastes, another factor that 
explains the continuing role of distance is the 
presence of social networks. Much online 
behavior is social, and social networks are 
highly local (Hampton and Wellman 2003). 
Therefore, while zero transportation costs 
of information mean that you can commu-
nicate with anyone anywhere in the world 
for the same price, the vast majority of most 
people’s email comes from those who either 
live at the same home or work in the same 
building. Gaspar and Glaeser (1998) specu-
late that because of the spatial correlation of 
social networks, the Internet may be a com-
plement to cities. More efficient commu-
nication would be especially important for 
those who communicate frequently. In other 
words, though the relative costs of communi-
cation fall more for distant communication, 
the overall importance of local communica-
tion might mean that cities benefit most. 
Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008) provide 
some evidence in support of this hypothe-
sis by showing that as new universities con-
nected to a 1980s ­Internet-like network, they 
increased their collaboration rate with those 
already connected. The biggest change in 
collaboration rates were for ­co-located uni-
versities in different quality tiers. The paper 
emphasizes the likely local social networks 
of researchers in the same city. Looking at 
online “crowdfunding” of music, Agrawal, 
Catalini, and Goldfarb (2015) provide further 
evidence of the importance of local social 
networks by showing that musicians’ early 
funding tends to come from local supporters 
who the musicians knew prior to joining the 
crowdfunding platform. As a musician gains 
prominence on the website, the later fund-
ing often comes from distant strangers. 
Finally, in the absence of the improve-
ments in verification discussed below, trust 
is easier locally. Hortacsu, Martinez-Jerez, 
and Douglas (2009) shows that ­same-city 
sales on eBay and MercadoLibre (a Brazilian 
electronic commerce platform) are dis-
proportionately high, likely because some 
products are observed and delivered in 
person. Furthermore, Forman, Ghose, and 
Wiesenfeld (2009) shows that Americans fol-
low the online product recommendations of 
others who live near them. 
5.2	 Can Policy Constrained by Geographic 
Boundaries Shape Digital Behavior?
Early work worried that the Internet could 
undermine local regulation and national sov-
ereignty (Castells 2001). The results of some 
research is consistent with this idea: Online 
sales have been higher where the differ-
ence between online and offline tax rates is 
highest (Goolsbee 2000, Ellison and Ellison 
2009b, Anderson et al. 2010, and Einav et al. 
2014). When local regulation prohibits offline 
advertising, similar online advertising is more 
expensive (Goldfarb and Tucker 2011e) 
and more effective (Goldfarb and Tucker 
2011a). This substitution suggests that online 
and offline markets should be considered 
together in the context of antitrust (Goldfarb 
and Tucker 2011f; Brand et al. 2014). 
At the same time, regulation can mean 
that users experience the Internet differ-
ently in different locations. At the extreme, 
regulation can prohibit certain content, 
making the experience of using the Internet 
different across locations. Zhang and Zhu 
(2011) examine the effect of the blocking 
of Wikipedia in China in October 2005 on 
the motivations of others outside China to 
contribute. Therefore, a key online website 
was available in some places and not others. 
More generally, some countries regularly 
block access to certain websites, changing 
the nature of the Internet across locations. 
Regulation can also change what users 
find available across locations. Copyright 
policy leads to variation in the availability 
and consumption of media across locations 

19
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
(­Gomez-Herrera, Martens, and Turlea 2014; 
Chiou and Tucker 2017; Athey, Mobius, and 
Pal 2017; and Calzada and Gil forthcoming). 
Privacy policy leads to different advertising 
and different website success (Goldfarb and 
Tucker 2011d and Tucker 2015). Trademark 
policy leads to different search experiences 
(Chiou and Tucker 2012 and Bechtold and 
Tucker 2014). 
Therefore, when regulation does not 
reach into the online sphere, the zero trans-
portation costs of information in the online 
channel generate a disproportionate benefit 
of online information in regulated contexts. 
However, when regulation does reach the 
online sphere, it can have a substantial effect 
on the nature of the Internet across locations. 
6.  Lower Tracking Costs
The first three drops in costs, those asso-
ciated with search, replication, and distance, 
were well discussed in the early digital eco-
nomics literature. However, the importance 
of the lowering of the next two costs we 
discuss, tracking and verification, has only 
become clear in the last decade. 
Digital activity is easily recorded and stored. 
In fact, many web servers store information 
automatically, and firms have to make a delib-
erate decision to discard data. Reductions 
in tracking costs enable personalization and 
the creation of ­one-to-one markets, leading 
to renewed interest in established economic 
models with asymmetric information and dif-
ferentiated products such as price discrimina-
tion, auctions, and advertising models. 
6.1	 Do Lower Tracking Costs Enable Novel 
Forms of Price Discrimination?
The ability to use digital technologies to 
track individuals enables personalized mar-
kets. Several economists recognized this 
potential for digital price discrimination 
as the Internet commercialized in the late 
1990s (Shapiro and Varian 1998; Smith, 
Bailey, and Brynjolfsson 2001; and Bakos 
2001). Even ­first-degree price discrimina-
tion seemed like it might become more than 
a theoretical curiosity. 
One form of price discrimination that has 
received a great deal of attention in the the-
ory literature on digital markets is behavioral 
price discrimination (see Fudenberg and 
­Villas-Boas 2007, 2012 for reviews). This lit-
erature emphasizes that the low cost of col-
lecting digital information makes it easier for 
companies to ­price discriminate based on 
an individual’s past behavior. The research 
builds on a large price discrimination liter-
ature that does not specifically emphasize 
digital markets (Hart and Tirole 1988; Chen 
1997; Fudenberg and Tirole 2000). Broadly, 
the research explores the benefits and costs of 
identifying previous customers for monopolies 
(­Villas-Boas 2004) and competing firms (Shin 
and Sudhir 2010; Chen and Zhang 2011). 
Fudenberg and ­Villas-Boas (2012) summarize 
this literature to conclude that under monop-
oly, firms benefit from the additional informa-
tion, but under competition the information 
may increase the intensity of competition. 
Furthermore, the benefits of the information 
to a monopoly may lead consumers to strate-
gically withhold information. In other words, 
consumers become ­privacy sensitive (Taylor 
2004; Acquisti and Varian 2005; Hermalin 
and Katz 2006). In the opposite direction, 
rules that restrict the flow of information hurt 
firms’ ability to price discriminate and there-
fore may leave some consumers unwilling to 
buy at the offered prices (Taylor and Wagman 
2014; Kim and Wagman 2015). 
Another form of price discrimination that 
has received attention in the digital eco-
nomics literature is versioning. Bhargava 
and Choudhary (2008) provide a model of 
versioning when variable costs are zero. Fay 
and Xie (2008) explore versioning based on 
probabilistic selling. For example, airlines 
and hotels offer low-price versions of their 
products on Priceline.com, in which there is 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
20
buyer uncertainty about the specific product 
being bought. 
Empirical support for digital price dis-
crimination is limited, despite the rich 
theoretical discussion of the potential for 
personalized pricing. For example, version-
ing is a basic form of ­third-degree price 
discrimination that precedes most digital 
markets (Maskin and Riley 1984; Deneckere 
and McAfee 1996; Corts 1998; Fudenberg 
and Tirole 1998). Rao (2015) provides exper-
imental support for the value of versioning 
digital products, demonstrating that online, 
limited-time “rentals” can increase profits 
by segmenting high- and low-value con-
sumers. Despite the ease of even this most 
straightforward form of price discrimina-
tion, Shiller and Waldfogel (2011) argue that 
digital firms may not be versioning, or more 
generally ­price discriminating, as much as 
would be optimal. In particular, they puz-
zle over the surprisingly uniform nature of 
pricing for digital music. They argue that 
uniform pricing of music appears to lead to 
­lower-than-optimal profits for firms, but do 
not provide a clear answer to this puzzle. 
While there is evidence of broad versioning 
of online media (Chiou and Tucker 2013; 
Lambrecht and Misra 2017), the theoreti-
cal literature on digital price discrimination 
seems to be ahead of the empirical work and 
of firm practices. While there is evidence of 
first-degree price discrimination in higher 
education (Waldfogel 2015), the only online 
research example we found is Dube and 
Misra (2017), who demonstrate the feasibil-
ity and profitability of targeting many prices 
to different customers of an online service 
based on a large number of characteristics. 
6.2	 Why Has There Been a Shift in 
Academic Emphasis from Personalized 
Pricing to Personalized Advertising?
Given the emphasis of the theoretical lit-
erature on the ease and practicality of behav-
ioral price discrimination and the potential 
for personalized pricing of goods online, it 
is perhaps a surprise that for many of these 
goods, consumers face a price of zero (Evans 
2009). Therefore, perhaps the most striking 
effect of the creation of low online tracking 
costs has not been to use personalized pro-
files to charge different consumers different 
prices, but instead to show these different 
consumers more appropriate, relevant, and 
profitable advertising. 
Variants of these ideas appear in a rich the-
ory literature on ­two-sided markets, empha-
sizing the digital context (Baye and Morgan 
2001; Anderson and de Palma 2009, 2013; 
White 2013; Athey, Calvano, and Gans 2018). 
Baye and Morgan (2001) demonstrate that 
an information intermediary will price low 
to consumers, while charging advertisers a 
high enough price that some choose not to 
participate. Anderson and de Palma (2009) 
and Athey, Calvano, and Gans’s (2018) papers 
each model consumer attention as scarce 
and explore advertiser competition for that 
attention. Athey, Calvano, and Gans (2018) 
emphasize that if an advertiser wants to send 
a message to a customer offline, they need to 
rely on noisy signals based on media demo-
graphics. In contrast, online targeting tech-
nology is such that an advertiser can target 
a particular consumer. In the presence of 
multiple media outlets and ­multi-homing by 
consumers, the equilibrium outcome is that 
online advertising prices can be much lower 
than offline advertising prices even though the 
online advertising is in fact more useful to the 
advertiser. However, Gentzkow (2014) argues 
that the price of attention is not lower online 
than offline, which challenges this prediction. 
Perhaps because of these forces, many 
of 
the 
largest 
online 
companies—in 
terms of revenues, profits, and users—are 
­advertising-supported. ­Low-cost tracking 
means that what distinguishes online adver-
tising from offline advertising is that it is tar-
geted (Goldfarb and Tucker 2011b, Goldfarb 
2014). This difference is highlighted in 

21
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
­models that explore competition between 
online and offline advertising (Athey and 
Gans 2010, Bergemann and Bonatti 2011, 
and Johnson 2013). Athey, Calvano, and 
Gans (2018) and Levin and Milgrom (2010) 
use very different models to demonstrate that 
better targeting may not help online media. 
Athey, Calvano, and Gans (2018) show that 
improved tracking can increase competition 
between media outlets. Levin and Milgrom 
(2010) show that too much targeting can lead 
to insufficient competition among advertisers 
for the user attention sold by a monopolist 
media firm. 
This better targeting has led to a thriving 
literature that measures advertising effec-
tiveness. Because ad messages are sent to 
individuals in bits (rather than broadcast 
through billboards and newspapers), it is 
relatively easy to identify consumers that see 
ads, to randomize which consumers see ads, 
and even to track those consumers through 
purchase. Until recently, this was very diffi-
cult, and so there were few studies that could 
deliver credible empirical measures of adver-
tising effectiveness. Low tracking costs make 
it relatively easy to run field experiments 
online, and large scale field experiments 
have been the focus of the recent literature. 
Research on online advertising effec-
tiveness has been largely conducted by 
research economists working with indus-
try. For example, Lewis and Reiley (2014) 
use a field experiment on 1.6 million Yahoo 
customers that connects online advertis-
ing to offline department store sales. They 
find that online advertising increases offline 
sales in a department store. Blake, Nosko, 
and Tadelis (2017) show that in many cases, 
search engine advertising—the key reve-
nue generator for Google—does not work. 
In particular, they demonstrate with a large 
field experiment at eBay that consumers 
will often click on the “organic” link anyway 
and navigate to the advertiser’s page. They 
argue that much search engine advertising is 
wasted. Simonov, Nosko, and Rao (2018) use 
data from Microsoft’s Bing search engine 
to show that the results for eBay may be 
driven by the strength of eBay as a partic-
ularly ­well-known brand. Less ­well-known 
advertisers seem to benefit from search 
advertising. 
While much better than prior ways to mea-
sure advertising effectiveness, there are still 
substantial challenges. Correlational research, 
even with detailed data, typically yields inac-
curate measures of advertising effects because 
the ­signal-to-noise ratio for advertising’s effect 
on sales is low (Lewis, Rao, and Reiley 2015; 
Gordon et al. 2016). Furthermore, even with 
experiments, advertising effects are subtle rel-
ative to the variance in purchase behavior, and 
so studies need to be highly powered (Lewis 
and Rao 2015). 
A large literature also emphasizes the 
role of targeting as a distinct and important 
feature of online advertising. Goldfarb and 
Tucker (2011c) shows that targeted banner 
advertising is effective, but only as long as 
it does not take over the screen too much. 
Targeting works when subtle, in the sense 
that it has the biggest effect on plain banner 
ads, relative to how it increases the effective-
ness of other types of ads. Lambrecht and 
Tucker (2013) and Tucker (2012a) demon-
strate the effectiveness of other types of 
online advertising targeting. 
As noted above, online media support 
their business by selling scarce consumer 
attention to advertisers. New technologies 
are emerging that allow consumers to block 
advertising online. Such ad blocking may 
reduce revenues and, perhaps counterintu-
itively, increase the quantity of ads shown 
to those without ad blockers (Anderson 
and Gans 2011). In a test of these ideas, 
Shiller, Waldfogel, and Ryan (2018) use 
data on ad blocking and website visits to 
show that widespread use of ad blockers 
may decrease the quality of websites on the 
­advertising-supported Internet. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
22
6.3	 Why Are Online Goods and Services 
Often Sold by Auction?
The rise of online advertising, along with 
­individual-level tracking technologies, has 
created a difficult pricing problem: how can 
a firm choose prices for thousands of adver-
tisements that might be priced differentially 
to millions or even billions of customers? As 
economists have ­long-recognized, auctions 
are a particularly useful tool for price discov-
ery. Consequently, digital markets typically 
use auctions to determine prices for adver-
tising. Auctions are also used to price some 
other goods. 
Originally, advertising on Yahoo!’s search 
page in the 1990s was priced according to 
a standard rate. Goto.com’s insight—that 
an auction could leverage the fact that the 
value of advertising depended on the search 
term—led to a new way to price discrimi-
nate in advertising. Rather than price for the 
search page, price could be at the level of 
the search term. Google and Bing’s ad auc-
tions run on this insight. A large literature 
has arisen to develop auction formats for this 
context (Varian 2007; Edelman, Ostrovsky, 
and Schwarz 2007; Levin and Milgrom 2010; 
Arnosti, Beck, and Milgrom 2016). Today, 
advertising auctions, particularly for display 
advertising, often take into account addi-
tional information provided by online track-
ing technologies, such as websites visited in 
the past and products observed. 
Less related to tracking costs, online auc-
tions have also been used for price discovery 
for goods, most notably on eBay. An early 
review of the auction literature is provided in 
Ockenfels, Reiley, and Sadrieh (2006). They 
emphasize that the transactions costs of con-
ducting and participating in auctions are 
lower in the digital context. Furthermore, 
many digital goods are not standardized in 
the sense that buyer valuations vary over 
time and location, and so the price discovery 
function of the auction is particularly useful. 
This idea also appears in Varian (2010), which 
describes the benefits of ­computer-mediated 
transactions with respect to decentralized 
price discovery, and therefore more finely 
based price discrimination. While auctions 
for goods (rather than advertising) still exist 
online, Einav et al. (2017) show that goods 
auctions are in decline as online markets 
have matured. The prominent role of auc-
tions in economic theory means that a sep-
arate literature has used the digital setting 
as a context to test ­long-established theory. 
This research, pioneered by ­Lucking-Reiley 
(1999), is not about digital markets per se, but 
uses the digital context to inform a broader 
theory literature (Roth and Ockenfels 2002, 
Bajari and Hortacsu 2003, and Einav et al. 
2018). 
6.4	 How Do Digital Markets Affect Privacy 
Policy?
Low tracking costs have led to a renewed 
interest in the economics of privacy, as high-
lighted by a recent review in this journal 
(Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman 2016). 
In general, the economics literature on 
privacy, both offline and online, grapples 
with the question of how privacy should be 
treated in terms of the consumers’ utility 
function. Should economists treat privacy as 
an intermediate good—that is, a good whose 
value simply lies in the way it can moderate 
the achievement of another good—or as a 
final good—that is, a good that should be 
enjoyed and valued for its own sake (Farrell 
2012)? Much ­policy making is grounded on 
the idea that privacy is a final good where a 
distaste for others intruding on or gathering 
knowledge about an individual’s personal 
domain is valid as a driver of an individual’s 
utility. However, much of the theoretical lit-
erature analyzes privacy as an intermediate 
good because of the implications for per-
sonalized pricing that are discussed above 
(Taylor 2004, Acquisti and Varian 2005, 
Hermalin and Katz 2006). 

23
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Privacy regulation can affect the nature and 
distribution of economic outcomes (Goldfarb 
and Tucker 2012a). Edelman (2009) and 
Lenard and Rubin (2009) emphasize that 
there is a ­trade-off between the use of online 
customer data to subsidize ­zero-price goods 
and advertising performance. Goldfarb and 
Tucker (2011d) show that European privacy 
regulation that restricted online tracking led 
to a substantial decline in the effectiveness of 
online advertising in Europe. Johnson (2014) 
estimates the financial effect of privacy pol-
icies on the online display ad industry, sug-
gesting that an ­opt-in policy or a tracking ban 
would reduce welfare substantially, though 
an ­opt-out policy would have little effect. 
Johnson’s paper is very useful for under-
standing the effect on publishers (rather than 
advertisers) of privacy regulation. 
Kim and Wagman (2015) show that regula-
tion of sharing financial information increased 
defaults on loans during the financial crisis. 
Miller and Tucker (2009, 2011) show that 
US healthcare privacy regulation reduced 
hospital adoption of electronic medical 
records, leading to worse health outcomes. 
On a more positive note in favor of privacy, 
Tucker (2014) shows that ­firm-implemented 
privacy controls designed to encourage con-
sumers’ perceptions of control can actually 
enhance the performance of online adver-
tising. Tucker (2012b) compares this result 
with work that suggests there may be bene-
fits from addressing consumer privacy con-
cerns, building on research that illustrates 
how perceptions of control influence privacy 
concerns in general (Brandimarte, Acquisti, 
and Loewenstein 2012). 
In general, the precise nature of privacy 
protection can be expected to matter a lot for 
the direction of innovation: it is not a matter of 
a simple binary choice to have privacy protec-
tion or not. This is emphasized in Miller and 
Tucker’s (2018) work, which shows that differ-
ent types of privacy protections had very dif-
ferent effects on the ­adoption of ­personalized 
medicine technologies: regulations that gave 
consumers control over disclosures enhanced 
adoption, but regulations that imposed con-
sent requirements decreased adoption. 
Privacy regulation puts a cost on tracking 
information flows. The welfare effects of 
these costs may be ambiguous. 
First, there may be ­knock-on effects to 
industry structure from privacy regulation. 
Campbell, Goldfarb, and Tucker (2015) show 
that because privacy regulations typically 
require firms to persuade their consumers 
to give consent, which in turn imposes a cost 
on the consumer, small firms and new firms 
are disproportionately affected because it is 
harder for them to obtain consent under the 
regulation. 
Second, welfare complications of privacy 
policies are also hard to assess due to a pri-
vacy paradox, where consumers state an affin-
ity for privacy, but then act in ways that are 
not consistent with this stated preference. 
Athey, Catalini, and Tucker (2017) provide 
some evidence about the extent to which 
small incentives, distracting information, 
and small navigation costs can lead to a gap 
between stated privacy preferences and actual 
behavior. Furthermore, assessing the value 
of privacy is complicated for many reasons, 
including that privacy preferences for the 
same individual change over time (Goldfarb 
and Tucker 2012b). 
Third, much of the work in the econom-
ics of privacy has understandably focused 
on questions relating to industrial organi-
zation, there are also implications of digital 
technologies and privacy for the economics 
of national security. In addition to improving 
the ability of firms to track consumers, digital 
technology allows government ­crime-fighting 
agencies to track a broad swathe of the 
population. Marthews and Tucker (2014) 
show that increasing consumer awareness 
of government data use leads to increased 
­privacy-protecting behavior among consum-
ers in their interactions with firms. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
24
7.  Reduction in Verification Costs
The reduction in tracking costs has also 
led to a reduction in costs associated with the 
verification of identity and reputation. This 
was not anticipated by the early literature 
in economics because the earliest reporting 
on the Internet suggested that it would be 
a vehicle for anonymity—“On the Internet, 
nobody knows you’re a dog.”5 Furthermore, 
in addition to tracking cost falling, digital 
technologies have also made it easier to verify 
identity and also create a digital reputation. 
In the absence of such technologies, a 
­long-standing solution for firms to provide 
credible information about quality was to 
develop a reputation in the form of a brand 
(Tadelis 1999, Smith and Brynjolfsson 2001, 
and Waldfogel and Chen 2006). However, 
digital markets involve thousands of small 
players. Furthermore, these small players 
can be unfamiliar to potential customers. 
Einav et al. (2017) estimate that 88 percent 
of online Visa transactions are with a mer-
chant that the customer does not visit offline. 
Alternative mechanisms to ­brand-based 
reputations are needed. The literature on 
verification costs builds on economic mod-
els of reputation, exploring when the expe-
riences of previous buyers and sellers can 
enable market exchange in the presence of 
asymmetric information about quality and 
trustworthiness. This emphasis on repu-
tation models distinguishes the literature 
on verification costs from the literature on 
tracking costs, which emphasizes price dis-
crimination, advertisement targeting, and 
other forms of personalization. 
7.1	 How Do Online Reputation Systems 
Facilitate Trust?
The most common such mechanism is an 
online rating systems in which ratings from 
5 The New Yorker on July 5, 1993. 
past buyers and sellers are posted for future 
market participants to see. The marketplace 
that has received the most attention in the 
literature is eBay. As mentioned above, one 
reason eBay has received so much attention 
by economists is that it provided a useful set-
ting to test auction theory. Another reason 
relates to reputation mechanisms. eBay rec-
ognized the challenges of getting people to 
buy from strangers whom they will not meet 
in person (Resnick and Zeckhauser 2002 and 
Livingston 2005). To address this issue, they 
built, and continually adapted and improved, 
a ratings system. The effectiveness and 
development of this ratings system has been 
the subject of hundreds of papers in econom-
ics and management. For example, Ba and 
Pavlou (2002) shows how a ratings system 
can enable trust in the absence of repeated 
interactions. A number of papers empirically 
demonstrate that ­better-rated sellers have 
higher prices and higher revenues (Melnik 
and Alm 2002, Livingston 2005, Houser and 
Wooders 2005, ­and Lucking-Reiley et al. 
2007). Cabral and Hortacsu (2010) demon-
strates differences between positive and 
negative feedback, emphasizing how the rat-
ings system acts as a disciplining force in the 
marketplace in which sellers with low ratings 
exit from eBay’s platform. 
Therefore, the original emphasis of the 
reputation literature was as a platform for 
establishing trust in ­long-distance transac-
tions. Dellarocas (2003) recognizes early on 
that the application of these feedback mech-
anisms was not limited to online exchange. 
Instead, Dellarocas argued that such mech-
anisms would enable a variety of market 
activities, both online and offline. As long as 
incentives to deviate are not too high, such 
systems can provide credible quality signals 
in a variety of settings (Dellarocas 2003 and 
Cabral 2012). 
One key application is to provide informa-
tion on product quality. Rather than enhance 
information about a particular seller, ratings 

25
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
can inform consumers about the best prod-
ucts available within a platform. It might 
be in the platform’s interest to provide such 
information so that consumers are directed 
to the highest-quality products. Comparing 
changes in reviews on Amazon relative to 
Barnes & Noble, Chevalier and Mayzlin 
(2006) demonstrate that positive reviews 
lead to higher sales. 
More recently, the literature has focused 
on how online tools reduce verification costs 
in offline settings. Luca (2011) shows how 
online restaurant reviews on Yelp affect 
restaurant demand, particularly for indepen-
dent restaurants. Overall, his results suggest 
that Yelp led to a decrease in the share of 
chain restaurants relative to independents. 
Hollenbeck (2018) finds a similar result for 
hotels. 
It is easier to establish an online reputa-
tion using online reputation mechanisms, 
but the mechanisms for damaging that rep-
utation in the form of consumer complaints 
have also become easier. Historically, com-
plaints were registered with letters, and then 
calls into call centers. Social media enables 
rapid widespread communication of com-
plaints to both the firm and a wider audi-
ence. Gans, Goldfarb, and Lederman (2016) 
use data from Twitter to explore ideas on the 
relationship between market power and con-
sumer voice first sketched out in Hirschman 
(1970). They show that consumers are more 
likely to voice their complaints via Twitter in 
locations where airlines have a higher share 
of flights. In turn, airlines are more likely 
to respond to consumers in these markets. 
Tucker and Yu (2017) show some positive 
effects of digital technologies, in that the 
use of mobile apps to receive complaints 
can actually advantage less-educated con-
sumers who are more likely to suffer from 
­employee–consumer discrimination in the 
treatment of their complaints. 
A benefit of improved online verifica-
tion procedures for individuals has been 
the ability to more securely and easily 
make ­payments. This is demonstrated by 
Economides and Jeziorski (2017), who 
show the power of using mobile devices 
to digitally verify identity in Tanzania. 
They show that this power enables the use 
of mobile payments networks to transfer 
money to others, but also, equally impor-
tantly, to transport money over short dis-
tances. People appear to deposit cash after 
work, walk home, and then pick up the cash 
at home. The verification system enables 
easy deposits and withdrawals, thereby 
reducing the risk of robbery. Digital ver-
ification, in the form of DNA databases, 
has also been shown to reduce crime 
(Doleac 2017). 
As technology improves, verification may 
continue to become easier. Researchers 
have speculated that the blockchain is a 
promising technology for reducing veri-
fication costs further (Catalini and Gans 
2016). Blockchain is a technology that 
combines insights from game theory and 
cryptography to enable the exchange of 
value between two distant untrusting par-
ties without the need for an intermediary. 
Transaction attributes, or information on 
the agents involved, can be cheaply veri-
fied if stored on a distributed ledger. This 
means that trust in an intermediary could 
be replaced by trust in the underlying code 
and rules that define how the network can 
reach agreement. Currently, most of the lit-
erature on blockchain technologies focuses 
on specific applications of the technology 
such as cryptocurrencies (Böhme et al. 2015 
and Catalini and Tucker 2017). However, 
if blockchain technologies achieve the 
promise highlighted in Catalini and Gans 
(2016), then we might see a diverse liter-
ature emerge over the next few years on 
the consequences of ­low-cost verification—
and the associated changing role for inter-
mediaries—across a variety of empirical 
settings. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
26
7.2	 Is There a Role for Policy in Reducing 
Reputation System Failures?
Given the important role of such systems 
in generating demand, it is perhaps unsur-
prising that the economics literature has 
focused on questioning when reputation sys-
tems fail. Often the failures relate to incom-
plete ability to verify the person doing the 
rating online. One type of failure relates to 
a selection bias: not all consumers provide 
ratings. Nosko and Tadelis (2015) show evi-
dence of such a selection bias, in which buy-
ers with a bad experience do not bother to 
rate the seller. They instead stop buying from 
any sellers on the platform into the future. 
Poor service by a seller therefore creates an 
externality. The failure of the reputation sys-
tems hurts the platform, rather than the indi-
vidual seller. Another type of failure relates 
to direct manipulation of the ratings by the 
firms or their competitors. Mayzlin, Dover, 
and Chevalier (2014) and Luca and Zervas 
(2016) show evidence of manipulation, in 
which firms seem to give themselves high rat-
ings while giving low ratings to their compet-
itors. This evidence of manipulation suggests 
that ratings systems alone are insufficient. 
The challenges of ratings systems were 
recognized relatively early in the digital eco-
nomics literature. Consider the market for 
collectible baseball cards. When buyer and 
seller are in the same place, the buyer can 
inspect the quality of the card in the store. 
They can look for rips, folds, or frayed edges. 
Online, quality is hard to assess. Jin and Kato 
(2006) provide evidence of fraud in these 
markets. They show that the online reputa-
tion system is insufficient in many ways. In a 
companion paper (Jin and Kato 2007), they 
show how a professional grading industry 
grew to help solve the information asym-
metry between buyers and sellers online. 
Stanton and Thomas (2016) shows the 
value of online intermediaries in ­providing 
­information beyond platform ratings by 
­examining worker and firm behavior on an 
online labor market. They show that new 
workers benefit from affiliating themselves 
with an agency. 
The platforms also work to improve their 
reputation systems. Fradkin, Grewal, and 
Holtz (2017) document two experiments 
made at Airbnb with this aim: offering 
monetary incentives to submit reviews and 
implementing a simultaneous review pro-
cess to reduce strategic reciprocity. Hui et 
al. (2016) show, in the context of eBay, that 
platforms benefit by having both reputation 
systems and regulations to expel bad actors. 
In each of these cases, it has been the pri-
vate sector that has reduced these reputa-
tion system failures. To the extent that there 
has been a role for policy, it has been in the 
enforcement of contracts and prevention of 
fraud. At this point, the literature does not 
point to a specific digital policy with respect 
to reputation systems failures. 
One aspect of policy related to verification 
is the nature of intellectual property tools 
such as trademarks. Trademarks allow cus-
tomers to verify whether a brand is indeed 
the brand it claims to be. Chiou and Tucker 
(2012) and Bechtold and Tucker (2014) doc-
ument that, online, consumers use trade-
marks to search ­proactively. The trademark 
therefore serves two purposes: it verifies 
identity and it provides a path to search for 
related products. Trademark policy needs to 
be narrow enough to facilitate search related 
to trademarks, but broad enough to ensure 
that such search does not sow confusion on 
brand identity. 
7.3	 How Do Digital Markets Affect 
­Antidiscrimination Policy?
A second policy issue driven by changes 
in verification relates to discrimination. If 
people were indeed truly anonymous on 
the Internet, then there could be no direct 
discrimination. However, the drop in ver-
ification costs and the ability to identify an 

27
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
­individual and also their characteristics 
makes discrimination possible (and poten-
tially low cost) in a digital environment. 
The question, then, for policy makers is 
whether there is something unique to the 
online setting that requires additional regu-
lation beyond existing ­antidiscrimination law. 
One area where this is hotly debated is in the 
use of algorithms to parse data and auto-
mate the allocation of resources and decision 
making. This is investigated in Lambrecht 
and Tucker (forthcoming), which shows that 
algorithms may lead to apparently discrim-
inatory outcomes for innocent reasons. In 
particular, they show that ads for STEM edu-
cation are disproportionately shown to men 
by online algorithms because advertising to 
men is less expensive overall than advertising 
to women, and so advertisers who are indif-
ferent to gender end up showing their ads to 
men more often. 
Broadly, on the one hand, while tracking 
is easier, such tracking may focus on dimen-
sions that are legally and morally less contro-
versial, such as preferences rather than race. 
If digital transactions mean that gender and 
race information is not revealed, then dis-
crimination may fall. Morton, Zettelmeyer, 
and Silva-Risso (2003) show that Internet 
car 
purchasing 
reduces 
gender- 
and 
­race-based price discrimination. Cullen and 
­Pakzad-Hurson (2017) show that a reduc-
tion of privacy of wages in online platforms 
decreases pay differences across workers 
(though it also reduces average pay). 
On the other hand, if gender, race, or 
other sensitive information is revealed, it is 
possible that, in the absence of other infor-
mation, discrimination is high. For example, 
Ayres, Banaji, and Jolls (2015) and Doleac 
and Stein (2013) show that sellers receive 
lower prices when a black hand is shown with 
the item than when a white hand is shown. 
Acquisti and Fong (2013) present the results 
of a field experiment to study how employers 
use information on social networks to filter 
the suitability of employees. They find con-
siderable use of social networking sites for 
­potentially discriminatory purposes. Similar 
results have been found in a variety of other 
online contexts (Pope and Sydnor 2011 and 
Edelman and Luca 2014). 
Both online and offline, discrimination 
is prevalent. Open questions remain as to 
whether discrimination is more prevalent 
online or offline, and as to whether policies 
aimed at reducing online discrimination spe-
cifically will reduce discrimination overall, 
or simply push discrimination into another 
setting. 
8.  Consequences of Digitization for 
Economic Actors
As people spend more time consuming 
digital media and buying products online, 
and as business and government increasingly 
use digital technology, it suggests a broader 
question: how does storing information in 
bits rather than atoms affect welfare? As 
search, reproduction, transportation, track-
ing, and verification costs fall, has that had 
an effect on the economy? 
Broadly, the literature has tackled this 
question in four different ways: ­country-level 
effects, 
­region-level 
effects, 
­firm-level 
effects, and ­consumer-level effects. 
8.1	 ­Country-level Effects
The macroeconomic productivity litera-
ture with respect to Internet technology has 
its roots in the Solow (1987) claim that “you 
can see the computer age everywhere but in 
the productivity statistics.” This “productiv-
ity puzzle” persisted for many years. A large 
growth accounting literature has arisen to 
examine this puzzle and measure the overall 
effect of digital technologies on the econ-
omy. While we view this literature as beyond 
the scope of this article, Jorgenson, Ho, and 
Stiroh (2008) and Bloom et al. (2010) both 
summarize it to suggest that there was a 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
28
­post-1995 productivity surge that was largely 
driven by digital technology investment and 
usage. 
Still, measuring the productivity shifts is 
difficult. Haltiwanger and Jarmin (2000) lay 
out several of the anticipated challenges in 
measuring the effect of the digital economy: 
service industry output, data on digital tech-
nology spending, price deflators, et cetera. 
A key challenge relates to intangible capital 
(Corrado and Hulten 2010), which has been 
found to affect productivity measurement 
in both the United States and the United 
Kingdom (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel 
2009; and Marrano, Haskel, and Wallis 
2009). Soloveichik (2010) takes on this mea-
surement challenge and identifies about $65 
billion in intangible capital related to books, 
movies, music, and television. 
A different stream of work on ­country-level 
effects examines how digital communication 
may affect trade flows for digital and physi-
cal goods. Freund and Weinhold (2004) pro-
vide suggestive evidence that the Internet 
increased trade in physical goods due to a 
reduction in the cost of international com-
munication. The asynchronous nature of 
email communication may be particularly 
important for reducing the cost of commu-
nication across many time zones (Borenstein 
and 
Saloner 
2001). 
­Gomez-Herrera, 
Martens, and Turlea (2014) suggest, how-
ever, that this increase may disproportion-
ately benefit ­English-language countries. 
Several of the papers highlighted earlier in 
this review demonstrate that the Internet 
facilitated trade in digital services (Blum 
and Goldfarb 2006, Alaveras and Martens 
2015, and Lendle et al. 2016), and this might 
lead to offshoring of certain jobs (Tambe 
and Hitt 2012). While there is some debate 
about whether distance matters less over-
all than it did prior to the diffusion of the 
Internet (Leamer 2007, Cristea 2011, and 
Krautheim 2012), our reading of the liter-
ature is that those papers that focus on the 
direct effect of the Internet find a decrease 
in the role of distance in trade (Freund and 
Weinhold 2004, Clarke 2008, Lendle et al. 
2016, and Hui forthcoming), while other 
papers identify other weaker forces moving 
in the ­opposite direction. Consistent with 
an effect of easy international communica-
tion on trade, Gorodnichenko and Talavera 
(2017) show that exchange rate ­pass-through 
is faster online. 
8.2	 ­Region-level Effects
Another question is the extent to which 
the Internet has led to redistribution of 
economic benefits within countries and, in 
particular, between cities and rural areas. 
Gaspar and Glaeser (1998) notes that digi-
tal communication could be a substitute or a 
complement to cities. Overall, the literature 
suggests that the biggest beneficiaries of dig-
ital technologies and data have been in large 
urban areas. The prime early beneficiaries of 
online media were in urban areas because the 
highest quality online content was produced 
in urban areas. This might be one reason 
why Savage and Waldman (2009) find that 
urbanites have higher willingness to pay for 
broadband. Eichengreen, Lafarguette, and 
Mehl (2016) show that efficient electronic 
communication in foreign exchange mar-
kets led to an increase in offshore currency 
trading and the consequent agglomeration 
of currency markets in London and a small 
number of other major financial centers. 
Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012) 
shows that wealthy cities were the primary 
beneficiaries of the business Internet. 
The mechanism through which cities 
appear to have benefited has been shown 
to depend on agglomeration effects, par-
ticularly with respect to skilled workers in 
local labor markets. Forman, Goldfarb, and 
Greenstein (2005, 2008) show that Internet 
adoption by businesses is higher in cities and 
in large companies but the advantage associ-
ated with being in a city or a large company 

29
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
are substitutes for each other. This indicates 
the importance of agglomeration effects. 
Dranove et al. (2014) finds similar results for 
hospitals. 
In contrast to the above work, there is 
some evidence that Internet adoption has 
some benefits for isolated individuals and 
rural areas. Autor (2001) and Gaspar and 
Glaeser (1998) speculated that the Internet 
might reduce the need for ­task-specific 
workspace, thereby increasing the preva-
lence of “telecommuting” and reducing the 
need for home and work to be nearby. Kolko 
(2012) shows that broadband disproportion-
ately benefited people in low density areas 
in terms of employment, though the over-
all effect is small. Furthermore, while the 
primary result in the Sinai and Waldfogel 
(2004) study cited above is that urban areas 
have higher quality Internet content, they 
also show that isolated individuals consume 
disproportionately more Internet news. For 
example, blacks in white neighborhoods con-
sume more Internet news. Finally, Forman, 
Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2005) show that 
basic Internet technologies have (perhaps 
disproportionately) benefited rural and iso-
lated cities. 
Overall, 
two 
forces 
are 
at 
play. 
Agglomeration effects mean that cities dispro-
portionately benefit. Low-cost communica-
tion, however, can benefit the geographically 
isolated. In any particular context, the overall 
result depends on the balance between these 
forces. Generally, the more difficult the tech-
nology is to use, the more likely that agglom-
eration effects dominate. 
8.3	 ­Firm-level Effects
As noted above, the growth accounting 
literature has suggested a compelling link 
between digital technology investments and 
productivity growth at the country level; 
however, causal inference is difficult with 
­macro-level measurement. There is a large 
and growing literature that documents a 
direct link from digital technology adop-
tion and usage to productivity growth at the 
firm level. By using micro data and various 
econometric techniques to address selec-
tion, omitted variables bias, and simultaneity, 
this literature has found that digital tech-
nology adoption and usage does enhance 
­productivity. However, the story is not as 
simple as it seems at first. Only some types 
of firms experience improved productivity. 
Various factors enhance or mitigate this rela-
tionship, including organizational change, 
skills, geography, regulation, firm size and 
age, and the potential for spillovers and/or 
network externalities. 
Reviews by Brynjolfsson and Saunders 
(2010) and Draca, Sadun, and Van Reenen 
(2009) conclude that ICT adoption and 
usage increase firm performance. This con-
clusion is driven by a large number of papers 
and a variety of settings. The correlation 
between IT and productivity is even stronger 
when ICT investment is modeled with a lag 
(Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003). 
There are also specific case studies on the 
effects of ICT on productivity. Baker and 
Hubbard (2004) show that ICT improved 
productivity in trucking. Jin and McElheran 
(2017) show improved productivity in manu-
facturing. Agrawal and Goldfarb (2008) show 
that BITNET increased academic produc-
tivity at ­middle-tier universities. In health 
care, Athey and Stern (2002) show that ICT, 
in the form of Enhanced 911, improved 
emergency response; Miller and Tucker 
(2011) and McCullough, Parente, and Town 
(2016) show that electronic medical records 
(EMRs) improve patient outcomes; Dranove 
et al. (2014) show that EMRs reduce hospital 
costs in the presence of complementary skills 
but not otherwise; and Lee, McCullough, 
and Town (2013) show that EMRs increase 
hospital productivity. 
Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012) 
use a ­large-scale ­multi-country ­firm-level 
panel database on ICT and productivity. 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
30
Their database contains 19,000 firms in thir-
teen EU countries over eleven years, plus 
a smaller panel of US firms over the same 
time period. They conclude that ICT does 
increase productivity, though they find con-
siderable heterogeneity in this effect across 
countries and type of firm. They emphasize 
the importance of ­organizational capital, 
showing that US multinationals operating 
in the United Kingdom experienced the 
same productivity miracle as ­US-based 
establishments. In contrast, other multi-
nationals (and other firms) in the United 
Kingdom did not. The title communicates 
the idea well: “Americans do I.T. better.” 
They argue that US firms are organized in 
way that allows them to use ICT more effi-
ciently. This essential role of organizational 
capital and organizational structure in mak-
ing productive use of ICT investments is a 
recurring theme elsewhere in the literature 
(Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt 2002; 
Brynjolfsson and Saunders 2010; Garicano 
2010; Tambe, Hitt, and Brynjolfsson 2012; 
and Brynjolfsson and McElheran 2016). 
In addition to change in the organiza-
tional structure, the most effective use of 
advanced ICT also involves “coinvention,” 
the process of adapting ICT to the organi-
zation’s needs (Bresnahan and Greenstein 
1996). Such process innovation is easiest for 
firms in places that have a pool of local ICT 
expertise to draw on (Forman, Goldfarb, and 
Greenstein 2008; and Dranove et al. 2014). 
This of course reflects the extensive litera-
ture on ­skill-biased technological change, 
which is long and beyond the scope of this 
review. As reviewed in Acemoglu and Autor 
(2012), given that prior generations of IT are 
­skill-biased, it is perhaps unsurprising that 
use of the Internet to enhance productivity 
is also ­skill-biased. Correspondingly, in the 
context of the Internet, Akerman, Gaarder, 
and Mogstad (2015) provide evidence that 
broadband diffusion in Norway dispropor-
tionately benefited skilled workers. 
8.4	 ­Consumer-level Effects
Measurements that focus on productivity 
or national income accounts do not measure 
consumer surplus. To the extent that much 
of the most valuable content online is free, 
measures of productivity and GDP may miss 
a potential increase in consumer surplus 
driven by the Internet (Scott and Varian 2015; 
Brynjolfsson, Eggers, and Gannamaneni 
2017; Greenstein and McDevitt 2011; and 
Goolsbee and Klenow 2006). With time use 
data, Wallsten (2013) demonstrates that we 
are spending an increasing proportion of our 
leisure time online, substituting for offline 
leisure (including television), and to a lesser 
extent work and sleep. Also with time use 
data, Goolsbee and Klenow (2006) estimate a 
consumer surplus of $3,000 per ­person-year 
in 2005. Goldfarb and Prince (2008) shows 
that this effect is heterogeneous. Overall, 
rich educated Americans are more likely to 
adopt and therefore, overall consumer sur-
plus disproportionately goes to the wealthy. 
At the same time, conditional on adoption, 
­lower-income people spend more time 
online. Therefore, among adopters, con-
sumer surplus (at least relative to overall con-
sumption) is higher for ­lower-income people. 
Many studies arrive at specific estimates of 
the consumer surplus from ­Internet-related 
technologies. Greenstein and McDevitt 
(2011) measures the consumer surplus 
associated with broadband diffusion at $4.8 
to $6.7 billion between 1999 and 2006. 
Brynjolfsson and Oh (2012) estimate the con-
sumer surplus from free online services to be 
close to $100 billion. Cohen et al. (2016) esti-
mate billions of dollars in consumer surplus 
from the UberX car service alone.6 
6 Greenstein and Nagle (2014) estimate an intangible 
benefit of digitization distinct from consumer surplus: the 
value of open source. It shows that open source software 
Apache generates at least $2 billion in unmeasured bene-
fits to the US economy. 

31
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Brynjolfsson, Eggers, and Gannamaneni 
(2017) provide perhaps the most compre-
hensive estimate of the consumer surplus 
of the Internet by using (incentive compat-
ible) choice experiments. For example, in 
one study, they asked people how much they 
would need to be paid in order to not have 
access to Facebook for a month. They then 
implemented the result by actually block-
ing their respondents’ access to Facebook in 
exchange for ­payment. They estimate a value 
of Facebook of about $750 per user per year, 
or $18 billion for the United States. They 
also generated ­user-level survey estimates of 
the consumer surplus from other free online 
services such as search engines ($16,000 per 
user per year) and online video ($900 per 
user per year). 
Before concluding, it is important to rec-
ognize that there are other, perhaps negative, 
changes to overall welfare that may result 
from shifts in Internet consumption that 
are not captured by these surplus measures. 
Belo, Ferreira, and Telang (2014) show a 
reduction in grades associated with schools 
adopting broadband, perhaps because online 
games distracted students. Bhuller et al. 
(2013) argue that Internet diffusion may have 
increased sex crime, likely due to increased 
consumption of pornography (not because 
of reporting or matching between offenders 
and victims). Similarly, Chan, Ghose, and 
Seamans (2016) suggest an increase in racial 
hate crimes associated with the Internet, and 
Falck, Gold, and Heblich (2014) suggest that 
Internet availability reduces voter turnout in 
elections. 
9.  Conclusions
Across a variety of fields, economists 
examine how digital technologies change 
economic activity. While these papers often 
have different perspectives and cite different 
literatures, a core theme is that digitization 
has reduced a number of specific economic 
costs. We have identified five such costs: 
search, reproduction, transportation, track-
ing, and verification. These themes inform 
our understanding of the nature of digital 
economic activity, and of the interaction 
between digital and ­non-digital settings. 
In defining the scope of this article, we 
drew boundaries. For example, we did 
not discuss work on ­skill-biased technical 
change. Because ­skill bias is not primarily 
driven by the storage of information in bits, 
and because there are several other reviews 
of that literature, we instead refer to Katz and 
Autor (1999), Acemoglu (2002), Goldin and 
Katz (2008), and Acemoglu and Autor (2012). 
Similarly, we limit the discussion of the digi-
tal technology growth accounting literature, 
referring the reader to Jorgenson, Ho, and 
Stiroh (2008) and Bloom et al. (2010). We 
also limited our discussion on three topics 
that have already received reviews in the 
Journal of Economic Literature: privacy 
(Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman 2016), online 
auctions (Bajari and Hortacsu 2004), and 
telecommunications pricing and universal 
service (Vogelsang 2003). 
This overview highlights that changes 
to economic behavior that result from the 
change of costs inherent in the digital con-
text are not as obvious as basic economic 
models might imply. Key open questions 
remain with respect to each of the cost 
changes highlighted. Further, other catego-
ries of costs may shift downwards as digital 
technology evolves. 
References
Aaltonen, Aleksi, and Stephan Seiler. 2016. “Cumula-
tive Growth in User-Generated Content Production: 
Evidence from Wikipedia.” Management Science 62 
(7): 2054–69.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Technical Change, Inequal-
ity, and the Labor Market.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 40 (1): 7–72.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire LeLarge, 
John Van Reenen, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2007. 
“Technology, Information, and the Decentralization 
of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
32
(4): 1759–99.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks 
and Technologies: Implications for Employment and 
Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor Economics: Vol-
ume 4B, edited by David Card and Orley Ashen-
felter, 1043–171. Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier, 
North-Holland.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Laibson, and John A. List. 
2014. “Equalizing Superstars: The Internet and the 
Democratization of Education.” American Economic 
Review 104 (5): 523–27.
Acquisti, Alessandro, and Christina M. Fong. 2013. 
“An Experiment in Hiring Discrimination via Online 
Social Networks.” Unpublished.
Acquisti, Alessandro, and Ralph Gross. 2009. “Pre-
dicting Social Security Numbers from Public Data.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 
(27): 10975–80.
Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman. 
2016. “The Economics of Privacy.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 54 (2): 442–92.
Acquisti, Alessandro, and Catherine Tucker. 2014. 
“Guns, Privacy, and Crime.” Unpublished.
Acquisti, Alessandro, and Hal R. Varian. 2005. “Condi-
tioning Prices on Purchase History.” Marketing Sci-
ence 24 (3): 367–81.
Adams, William James, and Janet L. Yellen. 1976. 
“Commodity Bundling and the Burden of Monop-
oly.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (3): 475–98.
Agrawal, Ajay, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb. 
2015. “Crowdfunding: Geography, Social Networks, 
and the Timing of Investment Decisions.” Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy 24 (2): 253–74.
Agrawal, Ajay, and Avi Goldfarb. 2008. “Restructuring 
Research: Communication Costs and the Democ-
ratization of University Innovation.” American Eco-
nomic Review 98 (4): 1578–90.
Agrawal, Ajay, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons. 
2016. “Does Standardized Information in Online 
Markets Disproportionately Benefit Job Applicants 
from Less Developed Countries?” Journal of Inter-
national Economics 103: 1–12.
Aguiar, Luis, and Joel Waldfogel. 2018. “As Streaming 
Reaches Flood Stage, Does it Stimulate or Depress 
Music Sales?” International Journal of Industrial 
Organization 57: 278–307.
Aguiar, Luis, and Joel Waldfogel. 2016. “Digitization, 
Copyright, and the Welfare Effects of Music Trade.” 
University of Minnesota Working Paper.
Aker, Jenny C. 2010. Digitization from Markets Near 
and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural Markets in 
Niger.” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
nomics 2 (3): 46–59.
Akerman, Anders, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogs-
tad. 2015. “The Skill Complementarity of Broadband 
Internet.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4): 
1781–824.
Alaveras, Georgios, and Bertin Martens. 2015. “Inter-
national Trade in Online Services.” Joint Research 
Centre Working Paper on Digital Economy 2015-08.
Allcott, Hunt, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. “Social 
Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election.” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 31 (2): 211–36.
Anderson, Chris. 2006. The Long Tail: Why the Future 
of Business Is Selling Less of More. New York: 
Hyperion.
Anderson, Eric T., Nathan M. Fong, Duncan I. 
Simester, and Catherine E. Tucker. 2010. “How Sales 
Taxes Affect Customer and Firm Behavior: The Role 
of Search on the Internet.” Journal of Marketing 
Research 47 (2): 229–39.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. 
“Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic Literature 42 
(3): 691–751.
Anderson, Simon P., and André de Palma. 2009. “Infor-
mation Congestion.” RAND Journal of Economics 40 
(4): 688–709.
Anderson, Simon P., and André de Palma. 2013. 
“Shouting to Be Heard in Advertising.” Management 
Science 59 (7): 1545–56.
Anderson, Simon P., and Joshua S. Gans. 2011. “Plat-
form Siphoning: Ad-Avoidance and Media Content.” 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (4): 
1–34.
Anenberg, Elliot, and Edward Kung. 2015. “Informa-
tion Technology and Product Variety in the City: The 
Case of Food Trucks.” Journal of Urban Economics 
90: 60–78.
Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Z. Frank. 2004. “Is All 
That Talk Just Noise? The Information Content of 
Internet Stock Message Boards.” Journal of Finance 
59 (3): 1259–94.
Arnosti, Nick, Marissa Beck, and Paul Milgrom. 2016. 
“Adverse Selection and Auction Design for Internet 
Display Advertising.” American Economic Review 
106 (10): 2852–66. 
Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S. Gans. 
2018. “The Impact of Consumer Multi-homing on 
Advertising Markets and Media Competition.” Man-
agement Science 64 (4): 1574–90. 
Athey, Susan, Christian Catalini, and Catherine Tucker. 
2017. “The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small Money, 
Small Costs, Small Talk.” Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Sloan Research Paper 5196-17.
Athey, Susan, and Joshua S. Gans. 2010. “The Impact 
of Targeting Technology on Advertising Markets and 
Media Competition.” American Economic Review 
100 (2): 608–13.
Athey, Susan, Markus Mobius, and Jeno Pal. 2017. 
“The Impact of News Aggregators on Internet News 
Consumption: The Case of Localization.” Stanford 
University Technical Report 3353. 
Athey, Susan, and Scott Stern. 2002. “The Impact of 
Information Technology on Emergency Health Care 
Outcomes.” RAND Journal of Economics 33 (3): 
399–432.
Autor, David H. 2001. “Wiring the Labor Market.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (1): 25–40.
Ayres, Ian, Mahzarin Banaji, and Christine Jolls. 2015. 
“Race Effects on eBay.” RAND Journal of Economics 
46 (4): 891–917.
Ba, Sulin, and Paul A. Pavlou. 2002. “Evidence of the 

33
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Effect of Trust Building Technology in Electronic 
Markets: Price Premiums and Buyer Behavior.” MIS 
Quarterly 26 (3): 1–26.
Bajari, Patrick, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2003. “The Win-
ner’s Curse, Reserve Prices, and Endogenous Entry: 
Empirical Insights from eBay Auctions.” RAND 
Journal of Economics 34 (2): 329–55.
Bajari, Patrick, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2004. “Economic 
Insights from Internet Auctions.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 42 (2): 457–86.
Baker, George P., and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2003. 
“Make versus Buy in Trucking: Asset Ownership, 
Job Design, and Information.” American Economic 
Review 93 (3): 551–72.
Baker, George P., and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2004. 
“Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board 
Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1443–79.
Bakos, Yannis. 2001. “The Emerging Landscape for 
Retail E-Commerce.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 15 (1): 69–80.
Bakos, Yannis, and Erik Brynjolfsson. 1999. “Bundling 
Information Goods: Pricing, Profits, and Efficiency.” 
Management Science 45 (12): 1613–30.
Bakos, Yannis, and Erik Brynjolfsson. 2000. “Bundling 
and Competition on the Internet.” Marketing Sci-
ence 19 (1): 63–82.
Balasubramanian, Sridhar. 1998. “Mail versus Mall: A 
Strategic Analysis of Competition between Direct 
Marketers and Conventional Retailers.” Marketing 
Science 17 (3): 181–95.
Bar-Isaac, Heski, Guillermo Caruana, and Vicente 
Cuñat. 2012. “Search, Design, and Market Struc-
ture.” American Economic Review 102 (2): 1140–60.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. 2001. “The 
Internet and the Investor.” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 15 (1): 41–54.
Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan. 2001. “Infor-
mation Gatekeepers on the Internet and the Com-
petitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets.” 
American Economic Review 91 (3): 454–74.
Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Schol-
ten. 2004. “Price Dispersion in the Small and in the 
Large: Evidence from an Internet Price Comparison 
Site.” Journal of Industrial Economics 52 (4): 463–96.
Bechtold, Stefan, and Catherine Tucker. 2014. “Trade-
marks, Triggers, and Online Search.” Journal of 
Empirical Legal Studies 11 (4): 718–50.
Belo, Rodrigo, Pedro Ferreira, and Rahul Telang. 2014. 
“Broadband in School: Impact on Student Perfor-
mance.” Management Science 60 (2): 265–82.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Alessandro Bonatti. 2011. 
“Targeting in Advertising Markets: Implications for 
Offline versus Online Media.” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics 42 (3): 417–43.
Besen, Stanley, Paul Milgrom, Bridger Mitchell, and 
Padmanabhan Srinagesh. 2001. “Advances in Rout-
ing Technologies and Internet Peering Agreements.” 
American Economic Review 91 (2): 292–96.
Bhargava, Hemant K., and Vidyanand Choudhary. 
2008. “Research Note—When is Versioning Optimal 
for Information Goods?” Management Science 54 
(5): 1029–35.
Bhuller, Manudeep, Tarjei Havnes, Edwin Leuven, 
and Magne Mogstad. 2013. “Broadband Internet: An 
Information Superhighway to Sex Crime?” Review of 
Economic Studies 80 (4): 1237–66.
Biasi, Barbara, and Petra Moser. 2018. “Effect of Copy-
rights on Science: Evidence from the U.S. Book 
Republication Program.” National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research Working Paper 24255.
Bitzer, Jürgen, and Philipp J. H. Schröder. 2005. 
“Bug-Fixing and Code-Writing: The Private Provi-
sion of Open Source Software.” Information Eco-
nomics and Policy 17 (3): 389–406.
Blake, Thomas, Chris Nosko, and Steven Tadelis. 2015. 
“Consumer Heterogeneity and Paid Search Effec-
tiveness: A Large-Scale Field Experiment.” Econo-
metrica 83 (1): 155–74.
Blake, Thomas, Sarah Moshary, Kane Sweeney, and 
Steven Tadelis. 2018. “Price Salience and Product 
Choice.” National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper 25186. 
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, Tobias Kretschmer, 
and Raffaella Sadun. 2010. “The Economic Impact 
of ICT.” London School of Economics Centre for 
Economic Performance Final Report.
Bloom, Nicholas, Luis Garicano, Raffaella Sadun, and 
John Van Reenen. 2014. “The Distinct Effects of 
Information Technology and Communication Tech-
nology on Firm Organization.” Management Science 
60 (12): 2859–85.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van 
Reenen. 2012. “Americans Do IT Better: US Mul-
tinationals and the Productivity Miracle.” American 
Economic Review 102 (1): 167–201.
Blum, Bernardo S., and Avi Goldfarb. 2006. “Does the 
Internet Defy the Law of Gravity?” Journal of Inter-
national Economics 70 (2): 384–405.
Böhme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, 
and Tyler Moore. 2015. “Bitcoin: Economics, Tech-
nology, and Governance.” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 29 (2): 213–38.
Borenstein, Severin, and Garth Saloner. 2001. “Eco-
nomics and Electronic Commerce.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 15 (1): 3–12.
Bourreau, Marc, Frago Kourandi, and Tommaso Val-
letti. 2015. “Net Neutrality with Competing Internet 
Platforms.” Journal of Industrial Economics 63 (1): 
30–73.
Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 
2017. “Greater Internet Use is Not Associated with 
Faster Growth in Political Polarization among US 
Demographic Group.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 114 (40): 10612–17.
Brand, Keith, Martin Gaynor, Patrick McAlvanah, 
David Schmidt, and Elizabeth Schneirov. 2014. 
“Economics at the FTC: Office Supply Retailers 
Redux, Healthcare Quality-Efficiencies Analysis, and 
Litigation of an Alleged Get-Rich-Quick Scheme.” 
Review of Industrial Organization 45 (4): 325–44.
Brandimarte, Laura, Alessandro Acquisti, and George 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
34
Loewenstein. 2012. “Misplaced Confidences: Privacy 
and the Control Paradox.” Social Psychological and 
Personality Science 4 (3): 340–47.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin 
M. Hitt. 2002. “Information Technology, Workplace 
Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: 
Firm-Level Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 117 (1): 339–76.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 1996. 
“Technical Progress and Co-invention in Computing 
and in the Uses of Computers.” In Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 1–78.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Austan Goolsbee. 2002. “Does 
the Internet Make Markets More Competitive? Evi-
dence from the Life Insurance Industry.” Journal of 
Political Economy 110 (3): 481–507.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Felix Eggers, and Avinash Ganna-
maneni. 2017. “Using Massive Online Choice Exper-
iments to Measure Changes in Well-Being.” MIT 
Working Paper.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2003. “Comput-
ing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 85 (4): 793–808.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Mohammad S. Rahman. 
2009. “Battle of the Retail Channels: How Product 
Selection and Geography Drive Cross-Channel Com-
petition.” Management Science 55 (11): 1755–65.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Duncan Simester. 
2011. “Goodbye Pareto Principle, Hello Long Tail: 
The Effect of Search Costs on the Concentration 
of Product Sales.” Management Science 57 (8): 
1373–86.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Michael D. Smith. 
2003. “Consumer Surplus in the Digital Economy: 
Estimating the Value of Increased Product Variety at 
Online Booksellers.” Management Science 49 (11): 
1580–96.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Kristina McElheran. 2016. 
“The Rapid Adoption of Data-Driven Decision-Mak-
ing.” American Economic Review 106 (5): 133–39.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and JooHee Oh. 2012. “The Atten-
tion Economy: Measuring the Value of Free Digital 
Services on the Internet.” https://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=icis2012.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Adam Saunders. 2010. Wired 
for Innovation: How Information Technology Is 
Reshaping the Economy. Cambridge and London: 
MIT Press.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Michael D. Smith. 2000. “Fric-
tionless Commerce? A Comparison of Internet and 
Conventional Retailers.” Management Science 46 (4): 
563–85.
Cabral, Luís. 2012. “Reputation on the Internet.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of the Digital Economy, 
edited by Martin Peitz and Joel Waldfogel, 344–54. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Cabral, Luís, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2010. “The Dynamics 
of Seller Reputation: Evidence from eBay.” Journal 
of Industrial Economics 58 (1): 54–78.
Caillaud, Bernard, and Bruno Jullien. 2003. “Chicken 
& Egg: Competition among Intermediation Service 
Providers.” RAND Journal of Economics 34 (2): 
309–28.
Cairncross, Frances. 1997. The Death of Distance: How 
the Communications Revolution Is Changing Our 
Lives. Cambridge and London: Harvard Business 
School Press.
Calzada, Joan, and Ricard Gil. Forthcoming. “What Do 
News Aggregators Do? Evidence from Google News 
in Spain and Germany.” Marketing Science.
Campbell, James, Avi Goldfarb, and Catherine Tucker. 
2015. “Privacy Regulation and Market Structure.” 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 24 
(1): 47–73.
Campbell-Kelly, Martin. 2004. From Airline Reserva-
tions to Sonic the Hedgehog: A History of the Soft-
ware Industry. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.
Carbajo, José, David de Meza, and Daniel J. Seid-
mann. 1990. “A Strategic Motivation for Commodity 
Bundling.” Journal of Industrial Economics 38 (3): 
283–98.
Carlton, Dennis W., Joshua S. Gans, and Michael Wald-
man. 2010. “Why Tie a Product Consumers Do Not 
Use?” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 
2 (3): 85–105.
Castells, Manuel. 2001. The Internet Galaxy: Reflec-
tions on the Internet, Business, and Society. Oxford 
and New York: Oxford University Press.
Catalini, Christian, and Joshua S. Gans. 2016. “Some 
Simple Economics of the Blockchain.” https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2874598.
Catalini, Christian, and Catherine E. Tucker. 2017. 
“When Early Adopters Don’t Adopt.” Science 357 
(6347): 135–36. 
Ceruzzi, Paul E. 2003. A History of Modern Comput-
ing, Second edition. Cambridge and London: MIT 
Press.
Chan, Jason, Anindya Ghose, and Robert Seamans. 
2016. “The Internet and Racial Hate Crime: Offline 
Spillovers from Online Access.” MIS Quarterly 40 
(2): 381–403.
Chen, Yongmin. 1997. “Paying Customers to Switch.” 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 6 
(4): 877–97.
Chen, Yongmin, and Tianie Zhang. 2011. “Equilibrium 
Price Dispersion with Heterogeneous Searchers.” 
International Journal of Industrial Organization 29 
(6): 645–54.
Chevalier, Judith A., and Dina Mayzlin. 2006. “The 
Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book 
Reviews.” Journal of Marketing Research 43 (3): 
345–54.
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. 2012. “How Does 
the Use of Trademarks By Third-Party Sellers Affect 
Online Search?” Marketing Science 31 (5): 819–37.
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. 2013. “Paywalls 
and the Demand for News.” Information Economics 
and Policy 25 (2): 61–69.
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. 2017. “Content 
Aggregation By Platforms: The Case of the News 
Media.” Journal of Economics and Management 
Strategy 26 (4): 782–805.

35
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Choi, Jeonghye, and David R. Bell. 2011. “Preference 
Minorities and the Internet.” Journal of Marketing 
Research 48 (4): 670–82.
Choi, Jay Pil, Doh-Shin Jeon, and Byung-Cheol Kim. 
2015. “Net Neutrality, Business Models, and Inter-
net Interconnection.” American Economic Journal: 
Microeconomics 7 (3): 104–41.
Choi, Tsan-Ming., ed. 2012. Handbook of Newsvendor 
Problems: Models, Extensions and Applications. New 
York: Springer Science and Business Media.
Chu, Chenghuan Sean, Phillip Leslie, and Alan 
Sorensen. 2011. “Bundle-Size Pricing as an Approx-
imation to Mixed Bundling.” American Economic 
Review 101 (1): 263–303.
Clarke, George R. G. 2008. “Has the Internet Increased 
Exports for Firms from Low and Middle-Income 
Countries?” Information Economics and Policy 20 
(1): 16–37.
Cohen, Peter, Robert Hahn, Jonathan Hall, Steven 
Levitt, and Robert Metcalfe. 2016. “Using Big Data 
to Estimate Consumer Surplus: The Case of Uber.” 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper 22627.
Cornes, Richard, and Todd Sandler. 1986. The Theory 
of Externalities, Public Goods, and Club Goods, Sec-
ond edition. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Corrado, Carol A., Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 
2009. “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic 
Growth.” Review of Income and Wealth 55 (3): 
661–85.
Corrado, Carol A., and Charles R. Hulten. 2010. “How 
Do You Measure a ‘Technological Revolution’?” 
American Economic Review 100 (2): 99–104.
Corts, Kenneth S. 1998. “Third-Degree Price Discrim-
ination in Oligopoly: All-Out Competition and Stra-
tegic Commitment.” RAND Journal of Economics 29 
(2): 306–23.
Crémer, Jacques, Patrick Rey, and Jean Tirole. 2000. 
“Connectivity in the Commercial Internet.” Journal 
of Industrial Economics 48 (4): 433–72.
Cristea, Anca D. 2011. “Buyer–Seller Relationships 
in International Trade: Evidence from U.S. States’ 
Exports and Business-Class Travel.” Journal of Inter-
national Economics 84 (2): 207–20.
Cullen, Zoe, and Chiara Farronato. 2016. “Outsourc-
ing Tasks Online: Matching Supply and Demand 
on Peer-to-Peer Internet Platforms.” HBS Working 
Paper.
Cullen, Zoe, and Bobak Pakzad-Hurson. 2017. “Equi-
librium Effects of Pay Transparency in a Simple 
Labor Market.” Harvard University Working Paper.
Dana, James D., Jr., and Eugene Orlov. 2014. “Internet 
Penetration and Capacity Utilization in the US Air-
line Industry.” American Economic Journal: Micro-
economics 6 (4): 106–37.
Danaher, Brett, and Michael D. Smith. 2014. “Gone 
in 60 Seconds: The Impact of the Megaupload 
Shutdown on Movie Sales.” International Journal of 
Industrial Organization 33: 1–8.
Danaher, Brett, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang. 
2014a. “Piracy and Copyright Enforcement Mech-
anisms. In Innovation Policy and the Economy, 
Volume 14, edited by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern, 
25–61. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Danaher, Brett, Michael D. Smith, Rahul Telang, 
and Siwen Chen. 2014b. “The Effect of Graduated 
Response Anti-piracy Laws on Music Sales: Evi-
dence from an Event Study in France.” Journal of 
Industrial Economics 62 (3): 541–53
de Cornière, Alexandre. 2016. “Search Advertising.” 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 8 (3): 
156–88.
De Los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortaçsu, and Matthijs R. 
Wildenbeest. 2012. “Testing Models of Consumer 
Search Using Data on Web Browsing and Purchas-
ing Behavior.” American Economic Review 102 (6): 
2955–80.
Dellarocas, Chrysanthos. 2003. “The Digitization of 
Word of Mouth: Promise and Challenges of Online 
Feedback Mechanisms.” Management Science 49 
(10): 1407–24.
Deneckere, Raymond J., and R. Preston McAfee. 1996. 
“Damaged Goods.” Journal of Economics and Man-
agement Strategy 5 (2): 149–74.
Diamond, Peter A. 1971. “A Model of Price Adjust-
ment.” Journal of Economic Theory 3 (2): 156–68.
Dinerstein, Michael, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and 
Neel Sundaresan. 2018. “Consumer Price Search 
and Platform Design in Internet Commerce.” Amer-
ican Economic Review 108 (7): 1820–59.
Dinlersoz, Emin M., and Pedro Pereira. 2007. “On the 
Diffusion of Electronic Commerce.” International 
Journal of Industrial Organization 25 (3): 541–74.
Disdier, Anne-Célia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puz-
zling Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral 
Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (1): 
37–48.
Doleac, Jennifer L. 2017. “The Effects of DNA Data-
bases on Crime.” American Economic Journal: 
Applied Economics 9 (1): 165–201.
Doleac, Jennifer L., and Luke C. D. Stein. 2013. “The 
Visible Hand: Race and Online Market Outcomes.” 
Economic Journal 123 (572): F469–92.
Draca, Mirko, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 
2009. “Productivity and ICTs: A Review of the Evi-
dence.” In The Oxford Handbook of Information and 
Communication Technologies, edited by Chrisanthi 
Avgerou, Robin Mansell, Fanny Quah, and Roger 
Siverstone, 100–147. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Dranove, David, Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and 
Shane Greenstein. 2014. “The Trillion Dollar Conun-
drum: Complementarities and Health Information 
Technology.” American Economic Journal: Economic 
Policy 6 (4): 239–70.
Dube, Jean-Pierre, and Sanjog Misra. 2017. “Scalable 
Price Targeting.” University of Chicago Working 
Paper.
Duch-Brown, Néstor, Lukasz Grzybowski, André 
Romahn, and Frank Verboven. 2017. “The Impact 
of Online Sales on Consumers and Firms: Evidence 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
36
from Consumer Electronics.” International Journal 
of Industrial Organization 52: 30–62.
Economides, Nicholas, and Benjamin E. Herma-
lin. 2012. “The Economics of Network Neutrality.” 
RAND Journal of Economics 43 (4): 602–29.
Economides, Nicholas, and Przemyslaw Jeziorski. 
2017. “Mobile Money in Tanzania.” Marketing Sci-
ence 36 (6): 815–37.
Edelman, Benjamin G. 2009. “Priced and Unpriced 
Online Markets.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 
23 (3): 21–36.
Edelman, Benjamin G., and Michael Luca. 2014. “Dig-
ital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com.” Har-
vard Business School Working Paper 14-054.
Edelman, Benjamin G., Michael Ostrovsky, and 
Michael Schwarz. 2007. “Internet Advertising and 
the Generalized Second-Price Auction: Selling Bil-
lions of Dollars Worth of Keywords.” American Eco-
nomic Review 97 (1): 242–59.
Eichengreen, Barry, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud 
Mehl. 2016. “Cables, Sharks and Servers: Technology 
and the Geography of he Foreign Exchange Market.” 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper 21884.
Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, Jonathan Levin, and 
Neel Sundaresan. 2018. “Auctions versus Posted 
Prices in Online Markets.” Journal of Political Econ-
omy 126 (1): 178–215.
Einav, Liran, Peter J. Klenow, Benjamin Klopack, 
Jonathan D. Levin, Larry Levin, and Wayne Best. 
2017. “Assessing the Gains from E-Commerce.” 
Unpublished.
Einav, Liran, Dan Knoepfle, Jonathan Levin, and Neel 
Sundaresan. 2014. “Sales Taxes and Internet Com-
merce.” American Economic Review 104 (1): 1–26.
Ellison, Glenn. 2011. “Is Peer Review in Decline?” 
Economic Inquiry 49 (3): 635–57.
Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2005. “Lessons 
about Markets from the Internet.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 19 (2): 139–58.
Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2009a. “Search, 
Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on the Internet.” 
Econometrica 77 (2): 427–52.
Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2009b. “Tax 
Sensitivity and Home State Preferences in Internet 
Purchasing.” American Economic Journal: Economic 
Policy 1 (2): 53–71.
Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2014. “Match 
Quality, Search, and the Internet Market for Used 
Books.” Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ershov, Daniel. 2017. “The Effects of Consumer 
Search Costs on Entry and Quality in the Mobile App 
Market.” University of Toronto Working Paper. 
Evans, David S. 2009. “The Online Advertising Indus-
try: Economics, Evolution, and Privacy.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 23 (3): 37–60.
Falck, Oliver, Robert Gold, and Stephan Heblich. 
2014. “E-lections: Voting Behavior and the Internet.” 
American Economic Review 104 (7): 2238–65.
Farrell, Joseph. 2012. “Can Privacy be Just Another 
Good?” Journal on Telecommunications and High 
Technology Law 10 (2): 251–64.
Farrell, Joseph, and Timothy Simcoe. 2012. “Four 
Paths to Compatibility.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of the Digital Economy, edited by Martin Peitz and 
Joel Waldfogel, 34–58. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Farronato, Chiara, and Andrey Fradkin. 2018. “The 
Welfare Effects of Peer Entry in the Accommoda-
tion Market: The Case of Airbnb.” National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper 24361. 
Fay, Scott, and Jinhong Xie. 2008. “Probabilistic Goods: 
A Creative Way of Selling Products and Services.” 
Marketing Science 27 (4): 674–90.
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joel Waldfogel. 2013. “Pop 
Internationalism: Has Half a Century of World 
Music Trade Displaced Local Culture?” Economic 
Journal 123 (569): 634–64.
Fleder, Daniel, and Kartik Hosanagar. 2009. “Block-
buster Culture’s Next Rise or Fall: The Impact of 
Recommender Systems on Sales Diversity.” Manage-
ment Science 55 (5): 697–712.
Forman, Chris, Anindya Ghose, and Avi Goldfarb. 
2009. “Competition between Local and Elec-
tronic Markets: How the Benefit of Buying Online 
Depends on Where You Live.” Management Science 
55 (1): 47–57.
Forman, Chris, Anindya Ghose, and Batia Wiesenfeld. 
2008. “Examining the Relationship between Reviews 
and Sales: the Role of Reviewer Identity Disclo-
sure in Electronic Markets.” Information Systems 
Research 19 (3): 291–313.
Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 
2005. “How Did Location Affect Adoption of the 
Commercial Internet? Global Village vs. Urban 
Leadership.” Journal of Urban Economics 58 (3): 
389–420.
Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 
2008. “Understanding the Inputs into Innovation: 
Do Cities Substitute for Internal Firm Resources?” 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 17 
(2): 295–316.
Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 
2012. “The Internet and Local Wages: A Puzzle.” 
American Economic Review 102 (1): 556–75.
Forman, Chris, and Kristina McElheran. 2013. 
“The Digital Reorganization of Firm Boundaries.” 
Unpublished. 
Forman, Chris, and Nicolas van Zeebroeck. 2012. 
“From Wires to Partners: How the Internet Has Fos-
tered R&D Collaborations within Firms.” Manage-
ment Science 58 (8): 1549–68.
Fradkin, Andrey. 2017. “Search, Matching, and the 
Role of Digital Marketplace Design in Enabling 
Trade: Evidence from Airbnb.” Unpublished.
Fradkin, Andrey, Elena Grewal, and David Holtz. 2017. 
“The Determinants of Online Review Informative-
ness: Evidence from Field Experiments on Airbnb.” 
MIT Sloan School of Management Working Paper.
Freund, Caroline L., and Diana Weinhold. 2004. 
“The Effect of the Internet on International Trade.” 
­Journal of International Economics 62 (1): 171–89.

37
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Friedman, Thomas L.. 2005. The World Is Flat: A Brief 
History of the Twenty-First Century. New York: Far-
rar, Straus and Giroux.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Upgrades, 
Tradeins, and Buybacks.” RAND Journal of Econom-
ics 29 (2): 235–58.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 2000. “Customer 
Poaching and Brand Switching.” RAND Journal of 
Economics 31 (4): 634–57.
Fudenberg, Drew, and J. Miguel Villas-Boas. 2007. 
“Behavior-Based Price Discrimination and Cus-
tomer Recognition.” In Economics and Information 
Systems, edited by Terrence Hendershott, 377–436. 
Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Fudenberg, Drew, and J. Miguel Villas-Boas. 2012. 
“Price Discrimination in the Digital Economy.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of the Digital Economy, 
edited by Martin Peitz and Joel Waldfogel, 254–72. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Gal-Or, Esther, and Anindya Ghose. 2005. “The Eco-
nomic Incentives for Sharing Security Information.” 
Information Systems Research 16 (2): 186–208.
Gandal, Neil. 2006. “Native Language and Internet 
Usage.” International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language 182: 25–40.
Gans, Joshua S., Avi Goldfarb, and Mara Lederman. 
2016. “Exit, Tweets, and Loyalty.” University of 
Toronto Rotman School of Management Working 
Paper 2889388.
Garicano, Luis. 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organiza-
tion of Knowledge in Production.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 108 (5): 874–904.
Garicano, Luis. 2010. “Policemen, Managers, Law-
yers: New Results on Complementarities between 
Organization and Information and Communication 
Technology.” International Journal of Industrial 
Organization 28 (4): 355–58.
Gaspar, Jess, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1998. “Informa-
tion Technology and the Future of Cities.” Journal of 
Urban Economics 43 (1): 136–56.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2007. “Valuing New Goods in a 
Model with Complementarity: Online Newspapers.” 
American Economic Review 97 (3): 713–44.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2014. “Trading Dollars for Dol-
lars: The Price of Attention Online and Offline.” 
American Economic Review 104 (5): 481–88.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2011. 
“Ideological Segregation Online and Offline.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 126 (4): 1799–839.
Gertner, Robert H., and Robert S. Stillman. 2001. 
“Vertical Integration and Internet Strategies in the 
Apparel Industry.” Journal of Industrial Economics 
49 (4): 417–40.
Ghani, Ejaz, William R. Kerr, and Christopher Stan-
ton. 2014. “Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence 
from oDesk and India.” Management Science 60 (7): 
1677–97.
Giorcelli, Michela, and Petra Moser. 2016. “Copy-
rights and Creativity: Evidence from Italian Operas.” 
Unpublished.
Goetz, Daniel. 2017. “Competition and Dynamic 
­Bargaining in the Broadband Industry.” University of 
Toronto Working Paper.
Goldfarb, Avi. 2006. “The (Teaching) Role of Univer-
sities in the Diffusion of the Internet.” International 
Journal of Industrial Organization 24 (2): 203–25.
Goldfarb, Avi. 2014. “What Is Different about Online 
Advertising?” Review of Industrial Organization 44 
(2): 115–29.
Goldfarb, Avi, Ryan C. McDevitt, Sampsa Samila, and 
Brian S. Silverman. 2015. “The Effect of Social Inter-
action on Economic Transactions: Evidence from 
Changes in Two Retail Formats.” Management Sci-
ence 61 (12): 2963–81.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Jeff Prince. 2008. “Internet Adop-
tion and Usage Patterns Are Different: Implications 
for the Digital Divide.” Information Economics and 
Policy 20 (1): 2–15.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011a. “Adver-
tising Bans and the Substitutability of Online and 
Offline Advertising.” Journal of Marketing Research 
48 (2): 207–27.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011b. “Online 
Advertising.” Advances in Computers 81: 289–315.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011c. “Online 
Display Advertising: Targeting and Obtrusiveness.” 
Marketing Science 30 (3): 389–404.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011d. “Privacy 
Regulation and Online Advertising.” Management 
Science 57 (1): 57–71.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011e. “Search 
Engine Advertising: Channel Substitution When 
Pricing Ads to Context.” Management Science 57 (3): 
458–70.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011f. “Substitu-
tion between Offline and Online Advertising Mar-
kets.” Journal of Competition Law and Economics 7 
(1): 37–44.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2012a. “Privacy 
and Innovation.” In Innovation Policy and the Econ-
omy, Volume 12, edited by Josh Lerner and Scott 
Stern, 65–89. Chicago and London: University of 
Chicago Press.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2012b. “Shifts in 
Privacy Concerns.” American Economic Review 102 
(3): 349–53.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race 
between Education and Technology. Cambridge and 
London: Harvard University Press.
Goldmanis, Maris, Ali Hortaçsu, Chad Syverson, and 
Önsel Emre. 2010. “E-Commerce and the Market 
Structure of Retail Industries.” Economic Journal 
120 (545): 651–82.
Gomez-Herrera, Estrella, Bertin Martens, and Geo-
mina Turlea. 2014. “The Drivers and Impediments 
for Cross-Border e-Commerce in the EU.” Informa-
tion Economics and Policy 28: 83–96.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “In a World without Borders: 
The Impact of Taxes on Internet Commerce.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 115 (2): 561–76.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2001. “Competition in the ­Computer 
Industry: Online versus Retail.” Journal of Industrial 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
38
Economics 49 (4): 487–99.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Peter J. Klenow. 2006. “Valuing 
Consumer Products By the Time Spent Using Them: 
An Application to the Internet.” American Economic 
Review 96 (2): 108–13.
Gordon, Brett R, Florian Zettelmeyer, Neha Bhar-
gava, and Dan Chapsky. 2016. “A Comparison of 
Approaches to Advertising Measurement: Evi-
dence from Big Field Experiments at Facebook.” 
Unpublished.
Gordon, Lawrence A., and Martin P. Loeb. 2002. “The 
Economics of Information Security Investment.” 
ACM Transactions on Information and System Secu-
rity 5 (4): 438–57.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Oleksandr Talavera. 2017. 
“Price Setting in Online Markets: Basic Facts, Inter-
national Comparisons, and Cross-Border Integra-
tion.” American Economic Review 107 (1): 249–82.
Greenstein, Shane. 2000. “Building and Delivering the 
Virtual World: Commercializing Services for Inter-
net Access.” Journal of Industrial Economics 48 (4): 
391–411.
Greenstein, Shane. 2015. How the Internet Became 
Commercial: Innovation, Privatization, and the Birth 
of a New Network. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton 
University Press.
Greenstein, Shane, and Ryan C. McDevitt. 2011. “The 
Broadband Bonus: Estimating Broadband Internet’s 
Economic Value.” Telecommunications Policy 35 (7): 
617–32.
Greenstein, Shane, and Frank Nagle. 2014. “Digital 
Dark Matter and the Economic Contribution of 
Apache.” Research Policy 43 (4): 623–31.
Greenstein, Shane, Martin Peitz, and Tommaso Valletti. 
2016. “Net Neutrality: A Fast Lane to Understanding 
the Trade-Offs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 
(2): 127–50.
Greenstein, Shane, and Feng Zhu. 2012. “Is Wikipe-
dia Biased?” American Economic Review 102 (3): 
343–48.
Hafner, Katie, and Matthew Lyon. 1996. Where Wiz-
ards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet. New 
York: Touchstone, Simon & Schuster.
Hagiu, Andrei. 2012. “Software Platforms.” In The 
Oxford Handbook of the Digital Economy, edited by 
Martin Peitz and Joel Waldfogel, 59–82. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hagiu, Andrei, and Bruno Jullien. 2011. “Why Do 
Intermediaries Divert Search?” RAND Journal of 
Economics 42 (2): 337–62.
Halaburda, Hanna, and Yaron Yehezkel. 2013. “Plat-
form Competition under Asymmetric Information.” 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5 (3): 
22–68.
Hall, Jonathan, Cory Kendrick, and Chris Nosko. 2016. 
“The Effects of Uber’s Surge Pricing: A Case Study.” 
Unpublished. 
Haltiwanger, John, and Ron S. Jarmin. 2000. “Mea-
suring the Digital Economy.” In Understanding 
the Digital Economy: Data, Tools, and Research, 
edited by Erik Brynjolfsson and Brian Kahin, 13–33. 
­Cambridge and London: MIT Press.
Hampton, Keith, and Barry Wellman. 2003. “Neigh-
boring in Netville: How the Internet Supports Com-
munity and Social Capital in a Wired Suburb.” City 
and Community 2 (4): 277–311.
Hart, Oliver D., and Jean Tirole. 1988. “Contract Rene-
gotiation and Coasian Dynamics.” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 55 (4): 509–40.
Heald, Paul J. 2009. “Does the Song Remain the Same? 
An Empirical Study of Bestselling Musical Composi-
tions (1913–1932) and Their Use in Cinema (1968–
2007).” Case Western Reserve Law Review 60 (1): 
1–46.
Henkel, Joachim. 2009. “Champions of Revealing—
The Role of Open Source Developers in Commer-
cial Firms.” Industrial and Corporate Change 18 (3): 
435–71.
Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael L. Katz. 2006. 
“Privacy, Property Rights and Efficiency: The Eco-
nomics of Privacy as Secrecy.” Quantitative Market-
ing and Economics 4 (3): 209–39.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: 
Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and 
States. Cambridge and London: Harvard University 
Press.
Hollenbeck, Brett. 2018. “Online Reputation Mecha-
nisms and the Decreasing Value of Chain Affiliation.” 
Journal of Marketing Research 55 (5): 636–54.
Honka, Elisabeth. 2014. “Quantifying Search and 
Switching Costs in the US Auto Insurance Industry.” 
RAND Journal of Economics 45 (4): 847–84.
Hortaçsu, Ali, F. Asís Martínez-Jerez, and Jason Doug-
las. 2009. “The Geography of Trade in Online Trans-
actions: Evidence from eBay and MercadoLibre.” 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 1 (1): 
53–74.
Horton, John J., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2016. 
“Owning, Using and Renting: Some Simple Eco-
nomics of the ‘Sharing Economy’.” National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper 22029.
Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan. 2006. “. . . Plus 
Shipping and Handling: Revenue (non) Equivalence 
in Field Experiments on eBay.” Advances in Eco-
nomic Analysis and Policy 5 (2).
Houser, Daniel, and John Wooders. 2006.  “Reputation 
in Auctions: Theory, and Evidence from eBay.” Jour-
nal of Economics and Management Strategy 15 (2): 
353–69.
Hui, Xiang. Forthcoming. “Facilitating Inclusive 
Global Trade: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” 
Management Science.
Hui, Xiang, Maryam Saeedi, Zeqian Shen, and Neel 
Sundaresan. 2016. “Reputation and Regulations: 
Evidence from eBay.” Management Science 62 (12): 
3604–16.
Jensen, Robert. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Informa-
tion (Technology), Market Performance, and Wel-
fare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 122 (3): 879–924.
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Andrew Kato. 2006. “Price, 
­Quality, and Reputation: Evidence from an Online 

39
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Field Experiment.” RAND Journal of Economics 37 
(4): 983–1005.
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Andrew Kato. 2007. “Dividing 
Online and Offline: A Case Study.” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 74 (3): 981–1004.
Jin, Wang, and Kristina McElheran. 2017. “Economies 
before Scale: Survival and Performance of Young 
Plants in the Age of Cloud Computing.” Rotman 
School of Management Working Paper 3112901.
Johnson, Garrett A. 2014. “The Impact of Privacy Pol-
icy on the Auction Market for Online Display Adver-
tising.” SSRN 233193.
Johnson, Justin Pappas. 2002. “Open Source Software: 
Private Provision of a Public Good.” Journal of Eco-
nomics and Management Strategy 11 (4): 637–62.
Johnson, Justin Pappas. 2013. “Targeted Advertising ad 
Advertising Avoidance.” RAND Journal of Economics 
44 (1): 128–44.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh. 
2008. “A Retrospective Look at the U.S. Productivity 
Growth Resurgence.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 22 (1): 3–24.
Jullien, Bruno. 2012. “Two-Sided B to B Platforms.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of the Digital Economy, 
edited by Martin Peitz and Joel Waldfogel, 161–85. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Katz, Lawrence, and David H. Autor. 1999. “Changes 
in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.” In 
Handbook of Labor Economics: Volume 3A, edited 
by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1463–555. 
Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier: North-Holland.
Kim, Jin-Hyuk, and Liad Wagman. 2015. “Screening 
Incentives and Privacy Protection in Financial Mar-
kets: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis.” RAND 
Journal of Economics 46 (1): 1–22.
Kolko, Jed. 2012. “Broadband and Local Growth.” 
Journal of Urban Economics 71 (1): 100–113.
Krautheim, Sebastian. 2012. “Heterogeneous Firms, 
Exporter Networks and the Effect of Distance on 
International Trade.” Journal of International Eco-
nomics 87 (1): 27–35.
Kremer, Michael, Conner Brannen, and Rachel Gel-
nnerster. 2013. “The Challenge of Education and 
Learning in the Developing World.” Science 340 
(6130): 297–300.
Kroft, Kory, and Devin G. Pope. 2014. “Does Online 
Search Crowd Out Traditional Search and Improve 
Matching Efficiency? Evidence from Craigslist.” 
Journal of Labor Economics 32 (2): 259–303.
Krugman, Paul. 1979. “A Model of Innovation, Technol-
ogy Transfer, and the World Distribution of Income.” 
Journal of Political Economy 87 (2): 253–66.
Kuhn, Peter, and Hani Mansour. 2014. “Is Internet 
Job Search Still Ineffective?” Economic Journal 124 
(581): 1213–33.
Kuhn, Peter, and Mikal Skuterud. 2004. ‘Internet Job 
Search and Unemployment Durations.” American 
Economic Review 94 (1): 218–32.
Kummer, Michael, Olga Slivko, and Michael Zhang. 
2015. “Economic Downturn and Volunteering: 
Do Economic Crises Affect Content Generation 
on Wikipedia?” Centre for European Economic 
Research Discussion Paper 15-078.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Scott Marcus, Patrick Rey, and 
Jean Tirole. 2001. “Internet Peering.” American Eco-
nomic Review 91 (2): 287–91.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Scott Marcus, Patrick Rey, and 
Jean Tirole. 2003. “Internet Interconnection and the 
Off-Net-Cost Pricing Principle.” RAND Journal of 
Economics 34 (2): 370–90.
Lambrecht, Anja, and Kanishka Misra. 2017. “Fee or 
Free: When Should Firms Charge for Online Con-
tent?” Management Science 63 (4): 1150–65.
Lambrecht, Anja, and Catherine Tucker. Forthcoming. 
“When Does Retargeting Work? Information Spec-
ificity in Online Advertising.” Journal of Marketing 
Research 50 (5): 561–76.
Lambrecht, Anja, and Catherine Tucker. 2018. “Algo-
rithmic Bias? An Empirical Study into Apparent 
Gender-Based Discrimination in the Display of 
STEM Career Ads.” Management Science.  
Leamer, Edward E. 2007. “A Flat World, a Level Play-
ing Field, a Small World After all, or None of the 
Above? A Review of Thomas L. Friedman’s The 
World Is Flat.” Journal of Economic Literature 45 
(1): 83–126.
Lee, Jinhyung, Jeffrey S. McCullough, and Robert J. 
Town. 2013. “The Impact of Health Information 
Technology on Hospital Productivity.” RAND Jour-
nal of Economics 44 (3): 545–68.
Lee, Robin S., and Tim Wu. 2009. “Subsidizing Cre-
ativity through Network Design: Zero-Pricing and 
Net Neutrality.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 
(3): 61–76.
Lemley, Mark A. 2003. “Place and Cyberspace.” Cali-
fornia Law Review 91 (2): 521–42.
Lenard, Thomas M., and Paul H. Rubin. 2009. “In 
Defence of Data: Information and the Costs of Pri-
vacy.” Washington, DC: Technology Policy Institute. 
Lendle, Andreas, Marcelo Olarreaga, Simon Schropp, 
and Pierre-Louis Vezina. 2016. “There Goes Gravity: 
eBay and the Death of Distance.” Economic Journal 
126 (591): 406–41.
Lerner, Josh, Parag A. Pathak, and Jean Tirole. 2006. 
“The Dynamics of Open-Source Contributors.” 
American Economic Review 96 (2): 114–18.
Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole. 2002. “Some Simple 
Economics of Open Source.” Journal of Industrial 
Economics 50 (2): 197–234.
Levin, Jonathan, and Paul Milgrom. 2010. “Online 
Advertising: Heterogeneity and Conflation in Mar-
ket Design.” American Economic Review 100 (2): 
603–07.
Lewis, Randall, and Justin M. Rao. 2015. “The Unfa-
vorable Economics of Measuring the Returns to 
Advertising.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 
(4): 1941–73.
Lewis, Randall, Justin M. Rao, and David H. Reiley. 
2015. “Measuring the Effects of Advertising: The 
Digital Frontier.” In Economic Analysis of the Dig-
ital Economy, edited by Avi Goldfarb, Shane M. 
­Greenstein, and Catherine E. Tucker, 191–218. Chi-

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
40
cago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Lewis, Randall, and David H. Reiley. 2014. “Online 
Ads and Offline Sales: Measuring the Effect of 
Retail Advertising via a Controlled Experiment on 
Yahoo!” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 12 
(3): 235–66.
Li, Xing, Megan MacGarvie, and Petra Moser. 2015. 
“Dead Poet’s Property—How Does Copyright Influ-
ence Price?” National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper 21522.
Lieber, Ethan, and Chad Syverson. 2012. “Online ver-
sus Offline Competition.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of the Digital Economy, edited by Martin Peitz and 
Joel Waldfogel, 189–223. Oxford and New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Liebowitz, Stan J. 2008. “Research Note—Testing File 
Sharing’s Impact on Music Album Sales in Cities.” 
Management Science 54 (4): 852–59.
Liebowitz, Stan J., and Alejandro Zentner. 2012. “Clash 
of the Titans: Does Internet Use Reduce Television 
Viewing?” Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 
234–45.
Livingston, Jeffrey A. 2005. “How Valuable Is a Good 
Reputation? A Sample Selection Model of Internet 
Auctions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (3): 
453–65.
Loginova, Oksana. 2009. “Real and Virtual Competi-
tion.” Journal of Industrial Economics 57 (2): 319–42.
Luca, Michael. 2011. “Reviews, Reputation, and Rev-
enue: The Case of Yelp.com.” Harvard Business 
School Working Paper 12-016.
Luca, Michael, and Georgios Zervas. 2016. “Fake It 
Till You Make It: Reputation, Competition, and 
Yelp Review Fraud.” Management Science 62 (12): 
3412–27.
Lucking-Reiley, David. 1999. “Using Field Experi-
ments to Test Equivalence between Auction For-
mats: Magic on the Internet.” American Economic 
Review 89 (5): 1063–80.
Lucking-Reiley, David, Doug Bryan, Naghi Prasad, 
and Daniel Reeves. 2007. “Pennies from eBay: The 
Determinants of Price in Online Auctions.” Journal 
of Industrial Economics 55 (2): 223–33.
Lucking-Reiley, David, and Daniel F. Spulber. 2001. 
“Business-to-Business Electronic Commerce.” Jour-
nal of Economic Perspectives 15 (1): 55–68.
Lynch, John G., and Dan Ariely. 2000. “Wine Online: 
Search Costs Affect Competition on Price, Quality, 
and Distribution.” Marketing Science 19 (1): 83–103.
Lyons, Elizabeth. 2017. “Team Production in Interna-
tional Labor Markets: Experimental Evidence from 
the Field.” American Economic Journal: Applied 
Economics 9 (3): 70–104.
MacGarvie, Megan, and Petra Moser. 2015. “Copyright 
and the Profitability of Authorship: Evidence from 
Payments to Writers in the Romantic Period.” In 
Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy, edited by 
Avi Goldfarb, Shane M. Greenstein, and Catherine 
E. Tucker, 357–79. Chicago and London: University 
of Chicago Press.
MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey K., and Hal Varian. 1994. 
“­Economic FAQs about the Internet.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 8 (3): 75–96.
Marrano, Mauro Giorgio, Jonathan Haskel, and Gavin 
Wallis. 2009. “What Happened to the Knowledge 
Economy? ICT, Intangible Investment, and Britain’s 
Productivity Record Revisited.” Review of Income 
and Wealth 55 (3): 686–716.
Marthews, Alex, and Catherine E. Tucker. 2014. “Gov-
ernment Surveillance and Internet Search Behavior.” 
SSRN 2412564.
Maskin, Eric, and John Riley. 1984. “Monopoly with 
Incomplete Information.” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics 15 (2): 171–96.
Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier. 
2014. “Promotional Reviews: An Empirical Investi-
gation of Online Review Manipulation.” American 
Economic Review 104 (8): 2421–55.
McCabe, Mark J., and Christopher M. Snyder. 2015. 
“Does Online Availability Increase Citations? Theory 
and Evidence from a Panel of Economics and Busi-
ness Journals.” Review of Economics and Statistics 97 
(1): 144–65.
McCullough, Jeffrey S., Stephen T. Parente, and Rob-
ert Town. 2016. “Health Information Technology 
and Patient Outcomes: The Role of Information and 
Labor Coordination.” RAND Journal of Economics 
47 (1): 207–36.
McElheran, Kristina. 2014. “Delegation in Multi-es-
tablishment Firms: Evidence from I.T. Purchasing.” 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 23 
(2): 225–58.
McKnight, Lee W., and Joseph P. Bailey. 1998. Internet 
Economics. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The 
Extensions of Man. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Melnik, Mikhail I., and James Alm. 2002. “Does a Sell-
er’s eCommerce Reputation Matter? Evidence from 
eBay Auctions.” Journal of Industrial Economics 50 
(3): 337–49.
Miller, Amalia R., and Catherine Tucker. 2009. “Privacy 
Protection and Technology Diffusion: The Case of 
Electronic Medical Records.” Management Science 
55 (7): 1077–93.
Miller, Amalia R., and Catherine Tucker. 2011. “Can 
Health Care Information Technology Save Babies?” 
Journal of Political Economy 119 (2): 289–324.
Miller, Amalia R., and Catherine Tucker. 2018. “Pri-
vacy Protection, Personalized Medicine, and Genetic 
Testing.” Management Science 64 (10): 4648–68.
Moore, Tyler, Richard Clayton, and Ross Anderson. 
2009. “The Economics of Online Crime.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 23 (3): 3–20.
Mortimer, Julie Holland, Chris Nosko, and Alan 
Sorensen. 2012. “Supply Responses to Digital Dis-
tribution: Recorded Music and Live Performances.” 
Information Economics and Policy 24 (1): 3–14.
Morton, Fiona Scott, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge 
Silva-Risso. 2003. “Consumer Information and Dis-
crimination: Does the Internet Affect the Pricing of 
New Cars to Women and Minorities?” Quantitative 
Marketing and Economics 1 (1): 65–92.

41
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Mustonen, Mikko. 2005. “When Does a Firm Support 
Substitute Open Source Programming?” Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy 14 (1): 121–39.
Nagaraj, Abhishek. 2016. “The Private Impact of Pub-
lic Information: Landsat Satellite Maps and Gold 
Exploration.” Unpublished.
Nagaraj, Abhishek. 2018. “Does Copyright Affect 
Reuse? Evidence from Google Books and Wikipe-
dia.” Management Science 64 (7): 3091–107.
Nocke, Volker, Martin Peitz, and Konrad Stahl. 2007. 
“Platform Ownership.” Journal of the European Eco-
nomic Association 5 (6): 1130–60.
Nosko, Chris, and Steven Tadelis. 2015. “The Limits 
of Reputation in Platform Markets: An Empirical 
Analysis and Field Experiment.” National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper 20830.
Oberholzer-Gee, Felix, and Koleman Strumpf. 2007. 
“The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An 
Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 
115 (1): 1–42.
Ockenfels, Axel, David Reiley, and Abdolkarim 
Sadrieh. 2006. “Online Auctions.” National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper 12785.
Orlov, Eugene. 2011. “How Does the Internet Influ-
ence Price Dispersion? Evidence from the Airline 
Industry.” Journal of Industrial Economics 59 (1): 
21–37.
Overman, Henry G., Stephen Redding, and Anthony 
Venables. 2003. “The Economic Geography of Trade, 
Production and Income: A Survey of Empirics.” In 
Handbook of International Trade, edited by E. 
Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, 353–87. Malden: 
Blackwell.
Parker, Chris, Kamalini Ramdas, and Nicos Savva. 
2016. “Is IT Enough? Evidence from a Natural 
Experiment in India’s Agriculture Markets.” Man-
agement Science 62 (9): 2481–503.
Peitz, Martin, and Patrick Waelbroeck. 2006. “Why 
the Music Industry May Gain from Free Download-
ing—The Role of Sampling.” International Journal of 
Industrial Organization 24 (5): 907–13.
Petty, Ross D. 2000. “Marketing without Consent: Con-
sumer Choice and Costs, Privacy, and Public Policy.” 
Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 19 (1): 42–53.
Peukert, Christian, Jorg Claussen, and Tobias Kret-
schmer. 2017. “Piracy and Box Office Movie Reve-
nues: Evidence from Megaupload.” International 
Journal of Industrial Organization 52: 188–215.
Pope, Devin G., and Justin R. Sydnor. 2011. “What’s in 
a Picture? Evidence of Discrimination from Prosper.
com.” Journal of Human Resources 46 (1): 53–92.
Pozzi, Andrea. 2013. “E-commerce as a Stockpiling 
Technology: Implications for Consumer Savings.” 
International Journal of Industrial Organization 31 
(6): 677–89.
Prince, Jeffrey T. 2007. “The Beginning of Online/
Retail Competition and Its Origins: An Application 
to Personal Computers.” International Journal of 
Industrial Organization 25 (1): 139–56.
Quan, Thomas W., and Kevin R. Williams. 2018. “Prod-
uct Variety, Across-Market Demand Heterogeneity, 
and the Value of Online Retail.” RAND Journal of 
Economics 49: 877–913.
Rao, Anita. 2015. “Online Content Pricing: Purchase 
and Rental Markets.” Marketing Science 34 (3): 
430–51.
Rao, Justin M., and David H. Reiley. 2012. “The Eco-
nomics of Spam.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 
26 (3): 87–110.
Reimers, Imke. 2016. “Can Private Copyright Protec-
tion Be Effective? Evidence from Book Publishing.” 
Journal of Law and Economics 59 (2): 411–40.
Resnick, Paul, and Richard Zeckhauser. 2002. “Trust 
among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical 
Analysis of eBay’s Reputation System.” In The Eco-
nomics of the Internet and E-Commerce, edited by 
Michael R. Baye, 127–57. Amsterdam and Boston: 
Elsevier, JAI.
Rob, Rafael, and Joel Waldfogel. 2006. “Piracy on the 
High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales Displacement, 
and Social Welfare in a Sample of College Students.” 
Journal of Law and Economics 49 (1): 29–62.
Rob, Rafael, and Joel Waldfogel. 2007. “Piracy on the 
Silver Screen.” Journal of Industrial Economics 55 
(3): 379–95.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Platform 
Competition in Two-Sided Markets.” Journal of the 
European Economic Association 1 (4): 990–1029.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The Economics of Superstars.” 
American Economic Review 71 (5): 845–58.
Rosenblat, Tanya S., and Markus M. Mobius. 2004. 
“Getting Closer or Drifting Apart?” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 119 (3): 971–1009.
Roth, Alvin E., and Axel Ockenfels. 2002. “Last-Min-
ute Bidding and the Rules for Ending Second-Price 
Auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon Auctions 
on the Internet.” American Economic Review 92 (4): 
1093–103.
Rysman, Marc. 2007. “An Empirical Analysis of Pay-
ment Card Usage.” Journal of Industrial Economics 
55 (1): 1–36.
Rysman, Marc, and Timothy Simcoe. 2008. “Patents 
and the Performance of Voluntary Standard-Set-
ting Organizations.” Management Science 54 (11): 
1920–34.
Salop, Steven C. 1979. “Monopolistic Competition 
with Outside Goods.” Bell Journal of Economics 10 
(1): 141–56.
Savage, Scott James, and Donald M. Waldman. 2009. 
“Ability, Location and Household Demand for Inter-
net Bandwidth.” International Journal of Industrial 
Organization 27 (2): 166–74.
Scott, Steven L., and Hal R. Varian. 2015. “Bayesian 
Variable Selection for Nowcasting Economic Time 
Series.” In Economic Analysis of the Digital Econ-
omy, edited by Avi Goldfarb, Shane M. Greenstein, 
and Catherine E. Tucker, 119–35.  Chicago and Lon-
don: University of Chicago Press.
Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge 
Silva-Risso. 2001. “Internet Car Retailing.” Journal 
of Industrial Economics 49 (4): 501–19.
Seamans, Robert, and Feng Zhu. 2014. “Responses to 

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LVII (March 2019)
42
Entry in Multi-sided Markets: The Impact of Craig-
slist on Local Newspapers.” Management Science 60 
(2): 476–93.
Shapiro, Carl, and Hal R. Varian. 1998. Information 
Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. 
Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press.
Shiller, Ben, and Joel Waldfogel. 2011. “Music for a 
Song: An Empirical Look at Uniform Pricing and Its 
Alternatives.” Journal of Industrial Economics 59 (4): 
630–60.
Shiller, Ben, Joel Waldfogel, and Johnny Ryan. 2018. 
“The Effect of Ad Blocking on Website Traffic and 
Quality.” RAND Journal of Economics 49: 43–63.
Shin, Jiwoong, and K. Sudhir. 2010. “A Customer Man-
agement Dilemma: When is It Profitable to Reward 
One’s Own Customers?” Marketing Science 29 (4): 
671–89.
Simcoe, Timothy. 2012. “Standard Setting Committees: 
Consensus Governance for Shared Technology Plat-
forms.” American Economic Review 102 (1): 305–36.
Simonov, Andrey, Chris Nosko, and Justin M. Rao. 
2018. “Competition and Crowd-Out for Brand Key-
words in Sponsored Search.” Marketing Science 37 
(2): 200–215.
Sinai, Todd, and Joel Waldfogel. 2004. “Geography and 
the Internet: Is the Internet a Substitute or a Com-
plement for Cities?” Journal of Urban Economics 56 
(1): 1–24.
Smith, Michael D., Joseph Bailey, and Erik Brynjolfs-
son. 2001. “Understanding Digital Markets: Review 
and Assessment.” In Understanding the Digital 
Economy: Data, Tools, and Research, edited by Erik 
Brynjolfsson and Brian Kahin, 99–136. Cambridge 
and London: MIT Press.
Smith, Michael D., and Erik Brynjolfsson. 2001. “Con-
sumer Decision-Making at an Internet Shopbot: 
Brand Still Matters.” Journal of Industrial Economics 
49 (4): 541–58.
Soloveichik, Rachel. 2010. “Artistic Originals as a 
Capital Asset.” American Economic Review 100 (2): 
110–14.
Solow, Robert M. 1987. “We’d Better Watch Out.” New 
York Times Book Review, July 12, 36.
Stanton, Christopher T., and Catherine Thomas. 2016. 
“Landing the First Job: The Value of Intermediaries 
in Online Hiring.” Review of Economic Studies 83 
(2): 810–54.
Stigler, George J. 1961. “The Economics of Informa-
tion.” Journal of Political Economy 69 (3): 213–25.
Stigler, George J. 1964. “Public Regulation of the Secu-
rities Markets.” Journal of Business 37 (2): 117–42.
Sunstein, Cass. 2001. Echo Chambers: Bush v. Gore, 
Impeachment, and Beyond. Princeton and Oxford: 
Princeton University Press.
Tadelis, Steven. 1999. “What’s in a Name? Reputation 
as a Tradeable Asset.” American Economic Review 89 
(3): 548–63.
Takeyama, Lisa N. 1994. “The Welfare Implications of 
Unauthorized Reproduction of Intellectual Property 
in the Presence of Demand Network Externalities.” 
Journal of Industrial Economics 42 (2): 155–66.
Tambe, Prasanna, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2012. “Now IT’s 
Personal: Offshoring and the Shifting Skill Composi-
tion of the U.S. Information Technology Workforce.” 
Management Science 58 (4): 678–95.
Tambe, Prasanna, Lorin M. Hitt, and Erik Brynjolfs-
son. 2012. “The Extroverted Firm: How Exter-
nal Information Practices Affect Innovation and 
­Productivity.” Management Science 58 (5): 843–59.
Taylor, Curtis R. 2004. “Consumer Privacy and the 
Market for Customer Information.” RAND Journal 
of Economics 35 (4): 631–50.
Taylor, Curtis R., and Liad Wagman. 2014. “Consumer 
Privacy in Oligopolistic Markets: Winners, Losers, 
and Welfare.” International Journal of Industrial 
Organization 34: 80–84.
Tucker, Catherine E. 2012a. “Patent Trolls and Tech-
nology Diffusion.” Paper presented at the Stan-
dards, Patents and Innovations Conference, January 
20–21.
Tucker, Catherine E. 2012b. “The Economics of Adver-
tising and Privacy.” International Journal of Indus-
trial Organization 30 (3): 326–29.
Tucker, Catherine E. 2014. “Social Networks, Person-
alized Advertising, and Privacy Controls.” Journal of 
Marketing Research 51 (5): 546–62.
Tucker, Catherine E. 2015. “Privacy and the Inter-
net.” In Handbook of Media Economics: Volume 1B, 
edited by Simon P. Anderson, Joel Waldfogel, and 
David Stromberg, 541–62. Amsterdam and Boston: 
Elsevier, North-Hampton.
Tucker, Catherine E., and Shuyi Yu. 2017. “Technol-
ogy and Inequality: The Role of Mobile Applications 
in the Inequality of Treatment of Customer Com-
plaints.” Unpublished.
Tucker, Catherine E., and Juanjuan Zhang. 2011. “How 
Does Popularity Information Affect Choices? A Field 
Experiment.” Management Science 57 (5): 828–42.
Varian, Hal R. 1980. “A Model of Sales.” American Eco-
nomic Review 70 (4): 651–59.
Varian, Hal R. 2005. “Copying and Copyright.” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 19 (2): 121–38.
Varian, Hal R. 2007. “Position Auctions.” International 
Journal of Industrial Organization 25 (6): 1163–78.
Varian, Hal R. 2010. “Computer Mediated Transac-
tions.” American Economic Review 100 (2): 1–10.
Varian, Hal R., Fredrik Wallenberg, and Glenn Woroch. 
2005. “The Demographics of the Do-Not-Call List.” 
IEEE Security and Privacy 3 (1): 34–39.
Villas-Boas, J. Miguel. 2004. “Price Cycles in Markets 
with Customer Recognition.” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics 35 (3): 486–501.
Vogelsang, Ingo. 2003. “Price Regulation of Access 
to Telecommunications Networks.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 41 (3): 830–62.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2010. “Music File Sharing and Sales 
Displacement in the iTunes Era.” Information Eco-
nomics and Policy 22 (4): 306–14.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2012a. “Copyright Research in the 
Digital Age: Moving from Piracy to the Supply of 
New Products.” American Economic Review 102 (3): 
337–42.

43
Goldfarb and Tucker: Digital Economics
Waldfogel, Joel. 2012b. “Digital Piracy: Empirics.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of the Digital Economy, 
edited by Martin Peitz and Joel Waldfogel, 531–46. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2015. “First Degree Price Discrimina-
tion Goes to School.” Journal of Industrial Econom-
ics 63 (4): 569–97.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2016. “Cinematic Explosion: New 
Products, Unpredictability and Realized Quality in 
the Digital Era.” Journal of Industrial Economics 64 
(4): 755–72.
Waldfogel, Joel, and Lu Chen. 2006. “Does Informa-
tion Undermine Brand? Information Intermediary 
Use and Preference for Branded Web Retailers.” 
Journal of Industrial Economics 54 (4): 425–49.
Waldfogel, Joel, and Imke Reimers. 2015. “Storming 
the Gatekeepers: Digital Disintermediation in the 
Market for Books.” Information Economics and Pol-
icy 31: 47–58.
Wallsten, Scott. 2013. “What Are We Not Doing 
When We’re Online.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper 19549.
Weyl, E. Glen. 2010. “A Price Theory of Multi-sided 
Platforms.” American Economic Review 100 (4): 
1642–72.
White, Alexander. 2013. “Search Engines: Left Side 
Quality versus Right Side Profits.” International 
Journal of Industrial Organization 31 (6): 690–701.
Williams, Heidi L. 2013. “Intellectual Property 
Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human 
Genome.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (1): 
1–27.
Xu, Lei, Tingting Nian, and Luis Cabral. 2016. “What 
Makes Geeks Tick? A Study of Stack Overflow 
Careers.” Unpublished.
Yang, Huanxing. 2013. “Targeted Search and the Long 
Tail Effect.” RAND Journal of Economics 44 (4): 
733–56.
Zentner, Alejandro. 2006. “Measuring the Effect of File 
Sharing on Music Purchases.” Journal of Law and 
Economics 49 (1): 63–90.
Zervas, Georgios, Davide Proserpio, and John W. Byers. 
2017. “The Rise of the Sharing Economy: Estimating 
the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry.” Journal 
of Marketing Research 54 (5): 687–705.
Zhang, Juanjuan, and Peng Liu. 2012. “Rational Herd-
ing in Microloan Markets.” Management Science 58 
(5): 892–912.
Zhang, Laurina. 2018. “Intellectual Property Strategy 
and the Long Tail: Evidence from the Recorded 
Music Industry.” Management Science 64 (1): 
24–42.
Zhang, Xiaoquan (Michael), and Feng Zhu. 2011. 
“Group Size and Incentives to Contribute: A Natural 
Experiment at Chinese Wikipedia.” American Eco-
nomic Review 101 (4): 1601–15.


============================================================
FILE: brynjolfsson2020covid.pdf
============================================================
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COVID-19 AND REMOTE WORK:
AN EARLY LOOK AT US DATA
Erik Brynjolfsson
John J. Horton
Adam Ozimek
Daniel Rock
Garima Sharma
Hong-Yi TuYe
Working Paper 27344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27344
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020
MIT's COUHES ruled this project exempt (project number E-2075). Code & Data: https://
github.com/johnjosephhorton/remote_work/. Thanks to Sam Lord for helpful comments. 
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this 
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27344.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Erik Brynjolfsson, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and 
Hong-Yi TuYe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be 
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the 
source.

COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data
Erik Brynjolfsson, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong-Yi
TuYe
NBER Working Paper No. 27344
June 2020
JEL No. I15,J21,L23,M15,M5
ABSTRACT
We report the results of a nationally-representative sample of the US population during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The survey ran in two waves from April 1-5, 2020 and May 2-8, 2020. Of 
those employed pre-COVID-19, we find that about half are now working from home, including 
35.2% who report they were commuting and recently switched to working from home. In 
addition, 10.1% report being laid-off or furloughed since the start of COVID-19. There is a strong 
negative relationship between the fraction in a state still commuting to work and the fraction 
working from home. We find that the share of people switching to remote work can be predicted 
by the incidence of COVID-19 and that younger people were more likely to switch to remote 
work. Furthermore, states with a higher share of employment in information work including 
management, professional and related occupations were more likely to shift toward working from 
home and had fewer people laid off or furloughed. We find no substantial change in results 
between the two waves, suggesting that most changes to remote work manifested by early April.
Erik Brynjolfsson
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-414
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
erikb@mit.edu
John J. Horton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
and NBER
john.joseph.horton@gmail.com
Adam Ozimek
Upwork
adam.r.ozimek@gmail.com
Daniel Rock
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-412
Cambridge, MA 02142
danielianrock@gmail.com
Garima Sharma
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
gsharma@mit.edu
Hong-Yi TuYe
MIT 
Sloan School of Management
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
hytuye@mit.edu
Code and Data are available at https://github.com/johnjosephhorton/remote_work/

1
Introduction
The on-going COVID-19 pandemic is rapidly transforming how, and even
whether, people work. Large numbers of people have remained in their homes
to avoid the disease or due to shelter-in-place orders. Many businesses are
closed and many people are not working remotely. There have been enor-
mous and unprecedented increases in workers ﬁling unemployment insurance
claims (Goldsmith-Pinkham and Sojourner, 2020). These changes in work
and employment have immediate implications for the economy, and may lead
to permanent shifts that last beyond the pandemic.
To get a real-time sense of how ﬁrms and workers are responding, we
conducted two waves of surveys using Google Consumer Surveys (GCS), one
each in April and May.1 In the April version of the survey we asked a single
question: ““Have you started to work from home in the last 4 weeks?” with
the following response options:
1. “I continue to commute to work”
2. “I have recently been furloughed or laid-oﬀ”
3. “Used to commute, now work from home”
4. “Used to work from home and still do”
5. “Used to work from home, but now I commute”
1GCS is a relatively low-cost tool for rapidly collecting responses to simple questions
Stephens-Davidowitz and Varian (2014), and response representativeness is often compa-
rable to similar alternatives (Santoso et al., 2016; Brynjolfsson et al., 2019).
2

6. “None of the above / Not working for pay”
In the May version, we updated the question to: ““Have you started to work
from home in the last 2 months?”
We launched a ﬁrst wave of our survey on April 1, 2020 and collected
responses until April 5, collecting a total of 25,000 responses. We launched a
second wave on May 2, 2020, collecting 25,001 responses until May 8, 2020.
We ﬁnd across both waves that over one third of workers have responded
to the pandemic by shifting to remote work, while another 10% have been
laid-oﬀor furloughed. There is a great deal of variation across states in the
share of people switching to remote work as well the share of people who
continue to commute. These can each be predicted by incidence of COVID-
19 as well as the industry composition of the state prior to the onset of the
crisis. We also ﬁnd that younger people were more likely than older people
to switch from commuting to remote work. Responses did not meaningfully
diﬀer across the two survey waves, suggesting that most changes to remote
work had already manifested by early April.
2
Results
We ﬁrst report results from the May version of the survey in the main ﬁgures,
and explore across-time diﬀerences in Section 2.5 below. Of the respondents,
13,937 reported something other than “None of the above...”
This gives
an implied employment rate of 56%, which is slightly lower than the BLS
estimate of about 60%.2 For the rest our analysis, we restrict our sample to
those reporting being employed prior to the onset of COVID-19.
The distribution of answers pooled over all respondents is shown in Fig-
ure 1. We can see that the most common response from workers was that
they continue to commute, at 37.1% (95% CI is [35.8,38.4]). But the next
2https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/EMRATIO
3

most common was that they have switched from commuting to working from
home.
The fraction of workers who switched to working from home is about
35.2%. In addition, 15.0% reporting they were already working from home
pre-COVID-19. This suggests about half the workforce is now working from
home, signiﬁcantly more than the Dingel and Neiman (2020) estimate of 37%
of people working at home.3
We ﬁnd that 10.1% of workers report recently being laid oﬀor furloughed.
This fraction is lower than the BLS estimate of 14.7% for April. The diﬀer-
ence may reﬂect the way respondents interpreted the phrase “furloughed or
laid-oﬀ” or “None of the above / Not working for pay” in our survey, while
the BLS reports a person as being unemployed if they have been out of a job
for a month and searching for employment. 4
2.1
Geographic variation
COVID-19 has aﬀected various parts of the US diﬀerently, with the main
epicenter in New York City. In Figure 2, we plot the fraction of respondents
choosing each answer by region. GCS captures a respondent’s city and state,
which are then mapped to the regions “Northeast”, “Midwest”, “West”, and
“South.”
In the ﬁrst facet from the left, we can see that the South has the highest
3Our estimates are broadly consistent with the broader literature, which includes a
relatively wide range of estimates. Krantz-Kentkrantz (2019) uses 2013-2017 American
Time Use Survey (ATUS) data to show 20.5% of workers working from home in some
way on an average day. However, our question implies working from home all the time.
The remote worker fraction in the ATUS is 11.4%. Our 14.2% estimate is also broadly
consistent with the “Freelancing in America Survey” that reported 16.8% of workers report
doing most or all of their work remotely, though this includes people working from co-
working spaces, coﬀee shops, homes, etc (Ozimek, 2020). At the lowest end, the 2019
Census reports 5.3% of workers as “working from home.”
The wide range in answers
suggests respondent uncertainty about the precise meaning of questions. Nevertheless,
our results lie well within the existing estimates.
4https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/empsit.pdf
4

Figure 1: Answers to the question “Have you started to work from home in
the last 2 months?”, conditional upon being in the labor force from a US
sample
G
G
G
G
G
Used to work from home, but now I commute
I have recently been furloughed or laid−off
Used to work from home and still do
Used to commute, now work from home
I continue to commute to work
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
% of working respondents
fraction still commuting to work and the Northeast has the lowest. In the
second facet from the right, we can see that the Northeast has the highest
fraction of respondents switching to working from home, and the South has
the fewest. The Northeast started from the lowest fraction working from
home, though these fractions are imprecisely estimated and are all fairly
similar to each other. The Northeast fraction now working from home is
over 40%.
For a ﬁner-grained look, we plot responses by state.
In Figure 5 we
plot the fraction of respondents that switched to working remotely. As we
saw in Figure 2, the highest fraction switching to working from home are
in the Northeast. The South and parts of the Midwest show substantially
less remote work. It is important to keep in mind that some of these point
estimates are fairly imprecise.
5

Figure 2: Responses by US region
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Used to commute,
now work from
home
Used to work from
home and still do
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
NORTHEAST
MIDWEST
WEST
SOUTH
NORTHEAST
MIDWEST
WEST
SOUTH
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
12%
15%
18%
21%
30%
35%
40%
30%
35%
40%
% of respondents
6

2.2 
By gender and age
In Figure 3 we report responses by inferred gender. Fractions are computed 
separately for males and females, and then a slope graph is used to show 
diﬀerences. Within all questions at a 95% conﬁdence interval, the diﬀerences 
between gender are not statistically signiﬁcant. Within our sample, however, 
it appears that men were modestly more likely to continue to commute to 
work, and likewise women more were more likely to report switching from 
commuter to work from home status. Men were also slightly more likely to 
have been recently furloughed or laid-oﬀ. Consistently working from home 
workers show little diﬀerence in gender composition.
In Figure 4 we report responses by inferred age. A similar proportion of 
workers continue to commute to work across all age groups, as is also the case 
for the recently furloughed or for the contingent of laid-oﬀ workers. On the 
other hand, the proportion of respondents that has recently converted from 
commuting to work to remote work steadily declines from the 25-34 age group 
to the 65 and older category. The diﬀerences between the 25-34 age group and 
the 65 and older group are statistically signiﬁcant, and, as Figure 4 shows, 
younger workers (above age 25) are more likely to have been converted to 
work from home from commuting.
Survey respondents in older age groups also reported remaining working 
remotely with greater propensities. These results are directionally consistent 
with the 2019 Census, though our estimates are larger. The diﬀerences may 
arise from a diﬀerence in the question asked. The Census asks about how 
workers get to work. The 2019 Upwork “Freelancing in America” study 
found younger workers were modestly more likely to work mostly or entirely 
from home Upwork (2019). It is possible that our survey is somewhere in 
between, grouping people who do some work at home with those who are 
fully committed remote labor. We will investigate further in future work.
7

Figure 3: Responses by gender
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
Used to
commute, now
work from home
Used to work
from home and
still do
Used to work
from home, but
now I commute
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Female
Male
% of respondents
8

Figure 4: Responses by inferred age
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
I continue to
commute to work
I have recently
been furloughed
or laid−off
Used to
commute, now
work from home
Used to work
from home and
still do
10%
20%
30%
40%
18−24
25−34
35−44
45−54
55−64
65+
Age of respondents
% of respondents
9

Figure 5: Fraction now working remotely, by US State
−2e+06
−1e+06
0e+00
−2e+06
−1e+06
0e+00
1e+06
2e+06
long
lat
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
frac
2.3
Predictors of across-state variation
The fractions laid-oﬀor furloughed by US State are shown in Figure 6.
In Figure 7 we plot the fraction of respondents working from home versus
the fraction still commuting by US state. There is a clear negative relation-
ship, suggesting a fraction of current commuters could potentially transition
to work-from-home status. Each 10 percentage point increase in the fraction
still commuting is associated with about a 6 percentage point decline in the
fraction of workers now working from home.
Table 1 documents how heterogeneity in COVID-19 infection rates (mea-
sured as the log of cases per 100,000 individuals5) aﬀects switching to remote
work or continuing to work from home. We report results from the April
(wave 1) as well as May (wave 2) waves of the survey. Column (1) shows
that a doubling in COVID-19 cases per 100k individuals is associated with a
5% rise in the fraction of workers who switch to working from home in wave
5Data
accessed
on
May
16,
2020
from
The
New
York
Times:
https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data
10

Figure 6: Fraction Laid-oﬀ/furloughed, by US State
−2e+06
−1e+06
0e+00
−2e+06
−1e+06
0e+00
1e+06
2e+06
long
lat
0.1
0.2
0.3
frac
Figure 7: Still commuting versus work from home fractions by US State
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Still commuting to work
Now WFH
11

1 and a 4.3% rise in wave 2.
Column (2) shows a similar rise in COVID-19 incidence as predicting a 
5.4% fall in the fraction of those continuing to commute in wave 1, and a 
2.7% fall in wave 2. Waves 1 and 2 show substantial consistency, supporting 
the conclusion that most changes to remote work occurred by the ﬁrst wave. 
We would expect these relationships if higher spread is associated with higher 
responsiveness of government or individuals. Surprisingly, we do not ﬁnd a 
strong or statistically signiﬁcant relationship between our measure of inci-
dence and survey reports of being furloughed or laid-oﬀ. These associations 
are not to be interpreted as causal and future work will explore the causal 
eﬀect of the pandemic on switches into remote work.
Tables 2, 3, and 4 document how the pre-COVID distribution of eco-
nomic activity across states predicts shifts into remote work. In Table 2 we 
look at how the pre-COVID share of workers working from home (measured 
in the 2017 ACS) inﬂuences survey responses. Interestingly, pre-COVID work 
from home share is not strongly predictive of COVID-induced shares of peo-
ple working from home or continuing to commute in either of the two survey 
waves.
Table 3 shows not all occupations have been aﬀected equally. In partic-
ular, states with more workers in “management, professional and related oc-
cupations” (Krantz-Kentkrantz (2019)) were more likely to have large shifts 
into remote work. This is consistent with the classiﬁcation of these occupa-
tions by the Bureau of Labor Statistics as having high potential for working 
from home. Columns (1)-(2) show that in the April wave of the survey a 
1% rise in the share of workers in these occupations is associated with a 1.1%
rise in those reporting now working from home and 1.1% decline in those re-
porting that they continue to commute to work. The May wave yields similar 
numbers at 1.1% rise in those reporting now working from home and a 0.9%
decline in those continuing to commute. Column (3) also shows a greater 
share in these occupations as being associated with a decline in furloughs or
12

Table 1: Predicting remote work by state incidence of COVID-19
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Wave 1
Log cases per 100k
0.050***
-0.054***
-0.000
population
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.007)
Constant
0.136***
0.590***
0.122***
(0.047)
(0.059)
(0.028)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.23
0.19
0.00
Panel B: Wave 2
Log cases per 100k
0.043***
-0.027*
-0.004
population
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.011)
Constant
0.115
0.513***
0.124*
(0.083)
(0.079)
(0.067)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.22
0.07
0.01
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
13

Table 2: Predicting remote work by pre COVID-19 work from home
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Wave 1
Pre-COVID fraction
1.161
-1.464
-0.325
working from home
(0.915)
(1.357)
(0.524)
Constant
0.278***
0.445***
0.136***
(0.040)
(0.061)
(0.026)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.02
0.02
0.01
Panel B: Wave 2
Pre-COVID fraction
0.337
-1.057
-0.038
working from home
(0.974)
(1.006)
(0.441)
Constant
0.337***
0.416***
0.103***
(0.044)
(0.047)
(0.023)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.00
0.02
0.00
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
14

layoﬀs.
Table 3: Management, Professional, and Related Occupations
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Wave 1
MPR share
1.152***
-1.100***
-0.229**
(0.122)
(0.170)
(0.092)
Constant
-0.092*
0.781***
0.205***
(0.049)
(0.064)
(0.035)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.47
0.30
0.07
Panel B: Wave 2
MPR share
1.076***
-0.889***
-0.143
(0.126)
(0.164)
(0.119)
Constant
-0.043
0.694***
0.153***
(0.050)
(0.066)
(0.048)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.45
0.28
0.02
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Table 4 shows that prior share in manufacturing employment is not a
statistically signiﬁcant predictor of switches into remote work.
However,
as expected, the sign of the coeﬃcient is negative. Similarly, pre-COVID-19
manufacturing share positively predicts continuing to commute. This pattern
is statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in Wave 2 of the survey; a
1% increase the pre-COVID-19 share of employment in manufacturing is
15

associated with a 0.84% increase in continuing to commute to work.
Table 4: Manufacturing
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Wave 1
Mfg share
-0.151
0.549
0.070
(0.385)
(0.363)
(0.185)
Constant
0.347***
0.322***
0.114***
(0.046)
(0.040)
(0.021)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.01
0.05
0.00
Panel B: Wave 2
Mfg share
-0.346
0.838***
-0.113
(0.404)
(0.308)
(0.236)
Constant
0.387***
0.284***
0.112***
(0.049)
(0.034)
(0.029)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.03
0.17
0.01
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
Taken together, these results suggest that places with greater capacity
for increasing the amount of working from home are not necessarily places
where workers are already working from home. Instead, the occupation mix
is more predictive than prior remote work of the “remote-ability” of the
marginal job that is not yet remote. Of course, these estimates are espe-
cially relevant for short-run adjustments that workers and their employers
16

can make. The longer term capacity to rely on remote work and associated
hysteresis in employment patterns will take months to years to make accurate
measurement possible.
2.4
Impact on unemployment
A natural question is how these various measures vary with unemployment
and UI claims by state.
In Table 5, we combine our data with that on
the April unemployment rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics 6. BLS
classiﬁes an individual as unemployed if they were out of work and searching
for at least four weeks. Our goal is to gauge the extent to which our survey
measures (from Wave 2) predict changes in unemployment between February
and April 2020.
Column (1) of Table 5 ﬁnds that a 1% rise in the fraction of those still
commuting to work is associated with 0.18% fall in unemployment rate. Col-
umn (2) ﬁnds a similar negative albeit not statistically signiﬁcant relationship
between working from home and the unemployment rate. Column (3) shows
that a 1% rise in survey reports of being unemployed or laid oﬀis associated
with a 0.53% rise in the unemployment rate.
Since COVID may have lowered the intensity of unemployed individuals’
search activity, causing BLS to under-report COVID-driven layoﬀs, we re-
peat the above exercise with the dependent variable being the negative of
the change in employed individuals (using payroll) between February and
April 2020, i.e. additions to unemployment from payroll between February
and April 2020. Unsurprisingly, across all speciﬁcations, the state population
explains a great deal of the variation in unemployment. We are interested in
asking whether our survey measures account for some of the residual varia-
tion.
Results reported in Table 6 paint a remarkably similar picture to the one
above. In Column (1), we append the state-speciﬁc fraction reporting that
6Accessed May 22, 2020 from https://www.bls.gov/web/laus/laumstcm.htm
17

Table 5: Predicting unemployment rate by state
Dependent variable:
Unemployment rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Still commuting
-0.180**
frac.
(0.069)
Now WFH frac.
-0.039
(0.075)
Laid-oﬀfrac.
0.527***
(0.118)
Still WFH frac.
-0.000
(0.000)
Constant
0.201***
0.148***
0.081***
0.136***
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.011)
(0.010)
Observations
51
51
51
51
R2
0.15
0.01
0.42
0.00
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
18

they were still commuting to work. The higher the fraction reporting still 
commuting, the lower the log change in unemployment for that state. States 
that still have large numbers commuting to work should have fewer lay-oﬀs, 
and so the coeﬃcient on the fraction still commuting should be negative. 
This pattern is consistent with the observed negative relationship between 
continuing to commute and the unemployment rate.
In Column (2), the greater the fraction that reports working from home, 
the higher the log change in unemployment. The fraction working from 
home should, on the one hand, have a protective eﬀect, keeping workers from 
becoming unemployed, but on other hand, a state with a high WFH fraction 
has likely had a particularly severe labor market shock, with many additional 
workers laid-oﬀ. What seems likely is that workers who would otherwise be 
continuing to commute to work are splitting into (a) work-from-home or (b) 
becoming unemployed.
Column (3), which includes a direct measure of reported lay-oﬀs is positive 
and signiﬁcant, but lower than expected in magnitude. Our expectation is 
that the elasticity of log of unemployment to the fraction laid-oﬀ should be 1. 
This discrepancy might be driven by survey respondents reporting “None of 
the above / Not working for pay” instead of “I have recently been furloughed 
or laid-oﬀ”.
Finally, in Table 7, we combine our data with that on UI claims from 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We regress the log of the UI claims in a 
state from mid-March till the end of April on the state’s population and the 
state-speciﬁc fraction for each of the response possibilities.
To interpret these results, consider a state i that has population P opi, 
an employment rate of Ei and a COVID-19-induced fraction of the working 
population laid-oﬀ of LOi. If UI claims perfectly measured lay-oﬀs, then the 
state’s UI claims would be PopiEiLOi and so a regression of log UI claims on 
the log of each of the terms should give each component a coeﬃcient of
1. In the regressions in Table 7, we use a state-speciﬁc employment rate
19

Table 6: Predicting unemployment numbers by state
Dependent variable:
Log of unemployed
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log of state
0.995***
1.003***
0.983***
1.039***
population
(0.029)
(0.035)
(0.038)
(0.070)
Still commuting
-2.122***
frac.
(0.386)
Now WFH frac.
1.329**
(0.619)
Laid-oﬀfrac.
2.418***
(0.732)
Still WFH frac.
-0.002
(0.002)
[1em] Constant
-1.899***
-3.276***
-2.734***
-3.273***
(0.464)
(0.645)
(0.581)
(0.990)
[1em] Observations
51
51
51
51
R2
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.93
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
20

pre-COVID-19 calculated from labor force participation per our own survey 
and the state population.
Columns 1-3 of Table 7 reveal patterns remarkably similar to Tables 5 and 
6 above. The higher the fraction reporting still commuting, the lower the UI 
claims for that state. The greater the fraction that reports working from 
home, the higher the UI claims. The higher the reported layoﬀ response, the 
higher the UI claims.
Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that workers who would otherwise 
be continuing to commute to work are splitting into (a) work-from-home or 
(b) becoming unemployed and ﬁling for UI.
2.5 
Changes over time
Survey responses between the ﬁrst wave (April 1-5) and second wave (May 
2-8) of the survey do not demonstrate signiﬁcantly diﬀerent patterns, driven 
largely by strong positive correlations in responses. For example, when look-
ing within states, the correlation in reports of workers having switched into 
remote work is 0.79; for continuing to commute to work, the correlation is 
0.73, and for being laid oﬀ or furloughed it is 0.63. As expected, the tables 
above thus reveal little change in pattern over time of workers switching into 
remote work, continuing to commute, or being laid oﬀ or furloughed. An 
earlier version of the paper 7, which plotted Figures 1-7 using data from the 
ﬁrst wave, shows results from the two survey waves as also revealing 
remarkably similar patterns. Taken together, these suggest that most short-
term changes to remote work and commuting had already occurred by the 
ﬁrst week of April.
To gauge whether changes in employment are dynamically responding to 
the COVID-19 crisis, we regress state-level changes in survey responses across 
the two survey waves on changes in state-level COVID-19 incidence. Table 
8 reports results. Column (1) reveals that the change in COVID-19 incidence 
is mildly predictive of changes in switches into remote work. A 1 point
 
7Can be accessed at https://github.com/johnjosephhorton/remote_work
21

Table 7: Predicting UI claims by state
Dependent variable:
Log state six week UI claims
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log of state
1.012***
1.019***
1.013***
1.125***
population
(0.035)
(0.042)
(0.033)
(0.061)
Log of LFPR
-0.554
-0.492
0.249
0.154
(0.408)
(0.499)
(0.470)
(0.526)
Still commuting
-1.666***
frac.
(0.473)
Now WFH frac.
0.671
(0.708)
Laid-oﬀfrac.
2.940***
(0.673)
Still WFH frac.
-0.004**
(0.002)
Constant
-2.304***
-3.221***
-2.765***
-4.052***
(0.519)
(0.788)
(0.553)
(0.793)
Observations
51
51
51
51
R2
0.95
0.93
0.94
0.93
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤0.1 : ∗, p ≤0.05 : ∗∗and p ≤.01 : ∗∗∗.
22

change in log of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 individuals between April and 
May increases switches into remote work during this period by 2%. Change in 
COVID-19 incidence does not, however, appear to aﬀect either continuing to 
commute or layoﬀs and furloughs.
Table 8: Predicting changes to work using changes to COVID
Dependent variable:
Work from home
Continue to commute
Furloughed or laid-oﬀ
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log change in COVID
-0.001
0.019**
-0.005
cases per 100k
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.006)
Constant
0.028
-0.110**
0.004
(0.044)
(0.051)
(0.033)
Observations
51
51
51
R2
0.00
0.07
0.01
Notes: Signiﬁcance indicators: p ≤ 0.1 : ∗, p ≤ 0.05 : ∗∗ and p ≤ .01 : ∗ ∗ ∗.
2.6 
Implications and suggestions for future work
These are a set of preliminary analyses of a rapidly-evolving crisis. We have 
documented some early shifts in the economy, and it remains to be seen if 
some of these changes will last beyond the end of the pandemic. For in-stance, 
once businesses and individuals invest in the ﬁxed costs of remote work, 
including technology but perhaps more importantly in developing the 
necessary human capital and organizational processes, then they may decide 
to stay with the new methods. Furthermore, the crisis has forced people 
to try out new approaches, some of which may be unexpectedly eﬃcient or 
eﬀective. In either case, lasting changes from the crisis would be expected.
Long term changes may involve not only remote work, but also the struc-
23

ture of industries and international trade. For example, tasks that can be
done by remote workers may be more likely to be oﬀ-shored, as distance
becomes less relevant. The tasks that comprise many occupations may be
unbundled and re-bundled to separate those that require in-person presence
at a business from those that can be done remotely. Remote work is one
way in which employers can protect both the health and job security of their
employees. Additional work to understand these changes is needed.
3 
Conclusion
We document some early facts about how the US labor force is responding to
COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we ﬁnd that between February and May
2020 over one third of the labor force switched to remote work, resulting in
about half of American workers now working from home. The state-level
COVID-19 infection rates predict these switches. Furthermore, states with
more people in management, professional and related occupations were more
likely to see large shifts toward working from home and had fewer people laid
oﬀ or furloughed.
If there is hysteresis as people learn new ways to work remotely and busi-
nesses reorganize, the pandemic-driven changes may portend more lasting
eﬀects on the organization of work. We will continue to track changes to
the nature of remote work, asking how pandemic-induced changes transform
workplaces in the short and long-term.
The code and data for this project are here: https://github.com/johnjosephhorton/remote work/.
24

References
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Avinash Collis, and Felix Eggers, “Using massive
online choice experiments to measure changes in well-being,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 2019, 116 (15), 7250–7255.
Dingel, Jonathan and Brent Neiman, “How Many Jobs Can be Done
at Home?,” Working paper, 2020.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul and Aaron Sojourner, “Predicting Initial
Unemployment Insurance Claims Using Google Trends,” Working paper,
2020.
Krantz-Kentkrantz, Rachel M, “Where did workers perform their jobs
in the early 21st century?,” Monthly Labor Review, 2019, pp. 1–10.
Ozimek, Adam, “Report: Overboard on Oﬀshore Fears,” 2020.
Santoso, Lie Philip, Robert Stein, and Randy Stevenson, “Survey
experiments with Google consumer surveys: Promise and pitfalls for aca-
demic research in social science,” Political Analysis, 2016, 24 (3), 356–373.
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth and Hal Varian, “A hands-on guide to
Google data,” Mountain View, CA, 2014.
Upwork, “Freelancing in America - 2019,” Report, 2019.
25


============================================================
FILE: favale2020campus.pdf
============================================================
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computer Networks 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet 
Campus traﬃc and e-Learning during COVID-19 pandemic 
Thomas Favale a , Francesca Soro a , Martino Trevisan a , ∗ , Idilio Drago b , Marco Mellia a 
a Politecnico di Torino, Italy 
b University of Turin, Italy 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Keywords: 
Computer networks 
COVID-19 epidemic 
Internet measurements 
e-Learning 
a b s t r a c t 
The COVID-19 pandemic led to the adoption of severe measures to counteract the spread of the infection. Social 
distancing and lockdown measures modiﬁed people’s habits, while the Internet gained a major role in supporting 
remote working, e-teaching, online collaboration, gaming, video streaming, etc. All these sudden changes put 
unprecedented stress on the network. 
In this paper, we analyze the impact of the lockdown enforcement on the Politecnico di Torino campus network. 
Right after the school shutdown on the 25 th of February, PoliTO deployed its own in-house solution for virtual 
teaching. Ever since, the university provides about 600 virtual classes daily, serving more than 16 000 students 
per day. Here, we report a picture of how the pandemic changed PoliTO’s network traﬃc. We ﬁrst focus on the 
usage of remote working and collaboration platforms. Given the peculiarity of PoliTO online teaching solution 
that is hosted in-house, we drill down on the traﬃc, characterizing both the audience and the network footprint. 
Overall, we present a snapshot of the abrupt changes seen on campus traﬃc due to COVID-19, and testify how 
the Internet has proved robust to successfully cope with challenges while maintaining the university operations. 
1. Introduction 
Since its ﬁrst outbreak between late 2019 and early 2020 in China, 
the COVID-19 pandemic has had a massive impact on people’s lives and 
habits. The countries most aﬀected by the virus spreading are facing an 
unprecedented health crisis, whose eﬀects will impact their economic 
and social structures for a long time. The urge to respect social dis- 
tancing and lockdown measures adopted to limit the spreading of the 
infection led to a shift in the fruition and supply of a wide number of 
services. Some examples include the increased usage of home delivery 
services, the shift to online lessons and the adoption of remote working 
solutions. 
Italy has been among the ﬁrst countries hit by COVID-19. The ﬁrst 
case was identiﬁed in the north of Italy on February 21 st , and on the 
same date, the Government issued the ﬁst law decree to impose quar- 
antine in small selected towns. On February 25 th , the Government ex- 
tended the restrictions to impose remote working for all public oﬃces, 
shutting down schools, and classes at Universities. Restrictions applied 
to the largest four regions in the north of Italy. On March 1 st , these 
restrictions were extended to the whole Italy, with further lockdown 
actions entering in place on March 4 th and 8 th . On March 11 th , the 
“#IoRestoACasa ” Prime Ministerial Decree imposed a total lockdown 
to the whole Italy. Since then, and still at the time of writing, people 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: thomas.favale@polito.it (T. Favale), francesca.soro@polito.it (F. Soro), martino.trevisan@polito.it (M. Trevisan), idilio.drago@unito.it (I. Drago), 
marco.mellia@polito.it (M. Mellia). 
are allowed to exit from home only for speciﬁc and urgent needs. Com- 
mon retail businesses, catering and restaurant services are suspended. 
Gatherings in public places are prohibited. All activities not deemed es- 
sential for the Italian production chain are closed. Italy entered the most 
restrictive lockdown in its history. 
Fig. 1 clearly depicts the impact of these measures. 1 It shows the 
variation of the mobility patterns in Italy since the begin of the emer- 
gency and the impact of the restrictions and total lockdown. The vertical 
bars highlight the relevant events listed above. The leftmost violet bar 
identiﬁes the date of the ﬁrst COVID-19 case in Italy. The central brown 
bar identiﬁes the school shutdown. The rightmost bar marks the date 
of the “#IoRestoACasa ” decree. The decrease in mobility is drastic after 
each of those events. 
Restrictions limited people’s mobility while remote working, e- 
learning, online collaboration platforms started to grow along with on- 
line leisure solutions, like gaming and video streaming. These new habits 
highlighted the fundamental role of the Internet. Correspondingly, Inter- 
net traﬃc volume has grown by about 40%, sometimes with a decrease 
in the download performance, questioning the resiliency of the Internet 
itself [1,2] . 
1 Source: https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107290 
Received 22 April 2020; Received in revised form 29 April 2020; Accepted 30 April 2020 
Available online 7 May 2020 
1389-1286/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 1. Variations in the mobility patterns in Italy between February and April 
2020. Colors mark the days in which new Ministerial Decrees introduced mo- 
bility restrictions. Source: https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility . 
In this paper, we analyze the changes in the traﬃc patterns that are 
visible from our university campus, the Politecnico di Torino (PoliTO 
for short) in Italy. We look at the campus traﬃc, focusing on collabo- 
ration and remote working platforms usage, remote teaching adoption, 
and look for changes in unsolicited/malicious traﬃc. PoliTO opted to 
implement an in-house e-learning solution based on the BigBlueButton 
framework to support all the classes of the second semester, which were 
scheduled to start on March 2 nd . 2 The platform has been designed, in- 
stalled, and tested during the ﬁrst week of March, going live for the 
starting of the online semester one week later. Here we leverage this 
unique point of view to observe changes in the campus traﬃc and ser- 
vices during such a singular event. Moreover, we dig into details on how 
students access online classes and teaching material. Since students en- 
joy classes from their homes at diﬀerent places, connected by diﬀerent 
network operators, we check whether and how these factors aﬀect the 
performance of the online teaching systems. 
Overall, we highlight a 10 times decrease in incoming traﬃc during 
the lockdown. Outgoing traﬃc grows instead of 2.5 times, driven by 
more than 600 daily online classes, with around 16 000 students per 
day that follow classes. Online collaboration exploded, with faculty and 
staﬀmembers exchanging more than 17 000 chat messages and partic- 
ipating to more than 1 000 calls per day. We observe a surge in remote 
learning and working also during the weekends. Considering Internet 
connectivity, we notice no major problems, with only a few cases of 
poor performance, possibly related to people connected via 3G/4G op- 
erators. 
In a nutshell, we believe this paper testiﬁes how the Internet proved 
able to cope with the sudden need for connectivity. We attest how re- 
mote working, e-learning and online collaboration platforms are a viable 
solution to cope with the social distancing policies during COVID-19 
pandemic. While we all hope the latter will soon be relieved, we be- 
lieve the experience of online collaboration will continue also after the 
COVID-19 disappears. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the datasets 
and methodology; Section 3 reports a drill-down on the aggregate cam- 
pus traﬃc patterns and online collaboration solutions; Section 4 focuses 
on online classes; Section 5 details network performance metrics, break- 
ing down by operator and region; Section 6 looks into possible changes 
in unsolicited and malicious traﬃc, such as portscans and spam emails; 
Section 7 summarizes related work; ﬁnally Section 8 concludes the 
paper. 
2. Datasets and methodology 
PoliTO is a medium-sized university that oﬀers bachelor, master and 
graduate-level courses in the engineering and architecture ﬁelds only. It 
2 https://bigbluebutton.org/ . 
is among the top Universities in Italy. PoliTO has about 35 000 students, 
of which 30% come from the Piedmont region where Torino is, 55% 
from other Italian regions, and 15% from the rest of the world. PoliTO 
employs about 2 000 faculty and researchers, and around 1 000 admin- 
istrative staﬀmembers. 3 PoliTO main campus network hosts all its IT 
services, and oﬀers both Ethernet and WiFi connectivity to departments, 
oﬃces, classrooms, student rooms, and laboratories. Two 10 Gbit/s ac- 
cess links connect the campus LAN to the Internet, through the GARR 
(Gruppo per l’Armonizzazione delle Reti della Ricerca) network, which 
provides Internet access to all Italian universities. 
In the following, we describe the data sources we use to gauge the 
changes in the traﬃc and services hosted at the campus network. If not 
explicitly said, the data cover the period from Saturday, February 1 st to 
Sunday, April 5 th 2020. 
2.1. Passive traces 
We leverage statistics collected by edge routers to observe and com- 
pare the load on diﬀerent Italian University networks. This data is stored 
by GARR in a central database publicly accessible. 4 The repository stores 
the time series of the traﬃc volume on each edge link of the GARR net- 
work, with a granularity of ﬁve minutes. In our analysis, we consider 
PoliTO campus and compare it with two other large Italian universi- 
ties for reference, namely Politecnico di Milano (the biggest technical 
university in Italy) and UniversitÃ di Torino. 5 
While GARR oﬀers only high-level aggregated data, here we also 
leverage on ﬁne-grained measurements exposed by the monitoring in- 
frastructure deployed in the Campus network. Such infrastructure is 
based on Tstat [3] , a passive sniﬀer that analyzes the traﬃc entering and 
leaving the Campus. It computes ﬂow-level logs similar to NetFlow, ex- 
posing information about TCP and UDP ﬂows observed in the network. 
Beside classical ﬂow-level ﬁelds, such as IP addresses and port num- 
bers, Tstat exposes metrics such as Round-Trip time (RTT) and packet 
losses. We store Tstat logs in a secured Hadoop-based cluster. Tstat lim- 
its as much as possible any information that can be used to identify 
users – e.g., client IP addresses are anonymized using the CryptoPan al- 
gorithm [4] , and no payload is stored. All data collection is approved 
and supervised by the responsible University oﬃcers. 
2.2. Application logs 
In addition to passive measurements, we extract data about servers 
and network devices oﬀering speciﬁc services and applications that staﬀ
members may use for smart working. We focus on three classes of ser- 
vices: (i) the tools to access the internal resources of the Campus while 
working from home, namely Virtual Private Network (VPN) and Remote 
Desktop Protocol (RDP) services; (ii) the Microsoft Teams collaborative 
platform, which PoliTO adopted since 2019 to oﬀer chat, ﬁle sharing, 
video calls and collaboration services to employees and students; (iii) 
email, antispam and security services. Logs available on the manage- 
ment consoles oﬀer rich information about the usage of these services 
over time and let us study how the adoption of such services varied 
during the epidemic. 
2.3. Virtual classrooms 
To face the lockdown during the COVID-19 outbreak, PoliTO opted 
to set up an internally-hosted virtual classroom service for all classes. 
The system is based on the BigBlueButton framework for online learn- 
ing, with customization to integrate it in the existing teaching portal. 
A total of 41 high-end servers running the BigBlueButton components 
3 https://www.polito.it/ateneo/colpodocchio/index.php?lang = en . 
4 https://gins.garr.it/home_statistics.php . 
5 UniversitÃ di Torino is a separate University which oﬀers degrees on sci- 
ences, humanities, economics, etc. 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 2. Traﬃc from three Italian Universities before and after the lockdown. 
and hosted in the Campus data center were set up in the ﬁrst week of 
March. All classes started a week late. The BigBlueButton client-side ap- 
plication is based on HTML5. It provides high-quality audio, video and 
screen sharing application using the browser’s built-in support for web 
real-time communication (WebRTC) libraries. In a nutshell, once the vir- 
tual classroom has been set up, BigBlueButton servers act as WebRTC 
Selective Forwarding Unit (SFU) capable of receiving multiple media 
streams (video, audio, screen sharing, etc.) and deciding which of these 
media streams should be sent to which participants. Video is encoded 
using the high-quality open-source codec VP8. PoliTO’s setup lets the 
lecturer choose four video quality levels with a bitrate of 50, 100 (the 
default), 200, 300 kbit/s. Screen sharing may require the highest share 
of bandwidth, and, if the presenter’s screen is updating frequently, the 
BigBlueButton client could transmit up to 1.0 Mbit/s. Audio is encoded 
using the OPUS encoder at 40 kb/s. 6 Finally, sharing slides takes little 
bandwidth beyond the initial upload/download of the pdf ﬁle. 
In our analyses, we collect and process the application logs of the 
video servers to study the consumption and performance of virtual class- 
rooms. We also make use of the logs of the legacy teaching web plat- 
forms to study access to the teaching material like lecture notes, pre- 
recorded classrooms, etc. 
2.4. Security monitors 
At last, we analyze logs from the campus border ﬁrewall that lim- 
its the access towards authorized servers while blocking possibly mali- 
cious traﬃc and well-known attacks. Since we are interested in remote- 
working solutions, we check the ﬁrewall for alarms related to SSH, RDP, 
SIP attacks. Intuitively, we want to check if the attack patterns changed 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The ﬁrewall is conﬁgured to let three /24 subnets to be completely 
open to the Internet, with no hosts connected to it. These sets of ad- 
dresses act as “darknets ”, i.e., sets of IP addresses regularly advertised 
which do not host any client or server. Any traﬃc the darknets receive 
is unsolicited by deﬁnition [5] . By passively analyzing incoming pack- 
ets, we observe important security events, such as the appearance and 
spread of botnets, DDoS attacks using spoofed IP address, etc. We use 
this information to further quantify if there is any change in attack pat- 
terns to our campus network during the pandemic. 
3. Impact on campus traﬃc and remote working solutions 
In this section, we analyze the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on 
campus networks. We ﬁrst provide quantitative ﬁgures on the overall 
traﬃc volume changes. Then, we focus on services supporting smart 
working. 
6 https://docs.bigbluebutton.org/support/faq.html#bandwidth- 
requirements . 
3.1. Aggregate traﬃc volume 
We ﬁrst focus on the volume of traﬃc entering and leaving three 
Italian university campuses. Fig. 2 shows the average hourly bitrate. 
For each hour, we compute the average bitrate seen over ﬁve working 
days. The positive y values represent incoming traﬃc (traﬃc directed 
to clients and servers hosted in the Campus LAN), while negative y val- 
ues report the outgoing traﬃc (traﬃc directed to clients and servers on 
the Internet). Lines mark the volumes before and after the lockdown: the 
black lines depict the average per-hour bitrate observed during the week 
before the lockdown (third week of February), the red ones refer to av- 
erages calculated on the second week after the lockdown (third week of 
March). For comparison, the ﬁgure includes plots for the Politecnico di 
Torino (PoliTO) in Fig. 2 a, the Politecnico di Milano (PoliMI) in Fig. 2 b 
and the UniversitÃ di Torino (UniTO) in Fig. 2 c. 
Focusing on the positive 𝑦 − axes, observe how the incoming traﬃc 
has shrunk in the three cases, reﬂecting the lockdown eﬀects. Since the 
second week of March, most students, researchers and staﬀmembers 
cannot access the campuses. The traﬃc after the lockdown is about one 
tenth of the traﬃc before it in both PoliTO and UniTO, with PoliMI 
still observing some sizeable incoming traﬃc. This diﬀerence reﬂects 
the diﬀerent lockdown policies imposed by each university. PoliTO and 
UniTO completely blocked all teaching and research activities, while 
PoliMI still allows the activity of some laboratories. 
The negative 𝑦 − axes report the outgoing traﬃc. Again, the three 
campuses present diﬀerent behaviors: We see a major increase in outgo- 
ing traﬃc from PoliTO, which is not observed in other campuses. This 
behavior is justiﬁed by the online teaching platform hosted in PoliTO 
which causes an increase of about 2.8 times the baseline outgoing traﬃc 
during peak time. PoliMI and UniTO have resorted to cloud-based solu- 
tions, hence the outgoing traﬃc volume does not show relevant changes 
before and after the lockdown. 
Take away: Campus incoming traﬃc drastically reduced during lock- 
down. Outgoing traﬃc changed in PoliTO, where an in-house online teaching 
service has been deployed. This system caused a massive inversion on traf- 
ﬁc patterns, with signiﬁcant growth in upload traﬃc due to online teaching 
services. 
3.2. Smart working adoption 
We now focus on PoliTO only and drill down on the services used by 
the personnel for working remotely. 
In Fig. 3 we show how the number of users relying on VPNs and re- 
mote desktop (RDP) solutions have changed over time. VPNs are used 
to access in-campus services and servers, while RDP allows one to re- 
motely access ﬁles or run applications on their oﬃce computers. Curves 
in Fig. 3 depict the total number of unique users accessing the services 
at least once in a day. 7 The eﬀect of the lockdown started on March 11 th 
7 VPN accesses are directly extracted from the VPN terminator logs. We iden- 
tify RDP connections from Tstat logs, considering TCP ﬂows directed to port 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 3. Daily accesses to in-house PoliTO smart working systems. 
Fig. 4. Daily activity on PoliTO Microsoft Teams systems. 
2020 is astonishing. Since the lockdown started, these solutions simulta- 
neously present a relevant increase in usage. PoliTO oﬀers VPN services 
both over IPSec and SSL. Interestingly, SSL-based VPN usage increases 
signiﬁcantly more than the IPSec-based solution. This suggests that the 
lockdown forced non-expert users to resort to a VPN, and they have 
opted for SSL-based VPN, which is easier to conﬁgure. 
Users working from home also heavily rely on RDP, with about 500 
users contacting such services at least once in a day after the lockdown. 
Sessions (not reported for the sake of brevity) last several hours, sug- 
gesting that this remote access method is mostly used for regular work- 
ing sessions, and not only to access ﬁles on computers left in oﬃces. 
Notice also the growth in the number of accesses over weekends, with 
more than 200 RDP accesses per day. This suggests that people, forced 
at home, keep working during the weekend, too. 
3.3. Remote collaboration 
We now move to remote collaboration suites. PoliTO oﬀers all em- 
ployees and students free access to the Microsoft Teams platform for 
smart working. Running on the cloud, it puts little loads on the campus 
network. Yet, its usage provides insights on people’s habits during the 
lockdown. 8 Fig. 4 summarizes the activity of Microsoft Teams users. It 
shows the number of team chat messages (i.e., chat messages to groups), 
private chat messages, calls and meetings . In Teams’ jargon, both calls and 
meetings are online video conferencing; calls have two participants. 9 
Each point in Fig. 4 marks the number of people using each func- 
tionality at least once in a day. Teams was already available but only 
marginally used in the campus before the lockdown, with few tens of 
users per day. As for other services supporting smart working, its usage 
3389 that exchanged at least 10 MB of data. We count users by their client IP 
addresses, which we assume to be unique on a daily basis. 
8 PoliTO staﬀmembers are not compelled to use Microsoft Teams, we, there- 
fore, expect other platforms to show similar signiﬁcant growth. 
9 https://docs.microsoft.com/it-it/microsoftteams/teams-analytics-and- 
reports/teams-reporting-reference - accessed April 2020. 
Fig. 5. Daily number of virtual classrooms and connected students (faculties 
and students). 
explodes during March. Compared to smart working connectivity solu- 
tions – see Fig. 3 – the growth is slightly less abrupt, showing that the 
people resorted ﬁrst to means to access their data and oﬃce computers, 
and then to online collaboration tools. People rely on Microsoft Teams 
as a means to exchange direct messages – more than 700 daily users 
sent private chat messages over Teams in the last week of March. In to- 
tal, they exchanged more than 17 000 messages per day. Interestingly, 
video calls and meetings keep growing as well, topping to 400 users per 
day, making more than 1 500 calls per day. Team chat messages instead 
show a drop in popularity after an initial surge. 
Take away: The lockdown has pushed smart working to widespread 
adoption. Remote services access via VPN and RDP, VoIP communications 
and online conferencing suddenly become regular for PoliTO users. 
4. Online teaching 
In this section, we study in detail the fruition and the performance of 
the online teaching system deployed at PoliTO. The compelled moving 
of all classes to an online solution allows us to evaluate (i) the impact 
of such a scenario on the campus networks, (ii) how students accessed 
these new services, and (iii) if students suﬀered any impairment due to 
limitation in the remote connectivity. 
4.1. Audience 
Fig. 5 provides a summary of the audience of PoliTO’s online teach- 
ing system. Only March is shown since the university has deployed the 
system from scratch to cope with the emergency. 
The number of virtual classrooms (black bars) follows the pattern of 
the university lecturing schedules, with around 700 virtual classrooms 
per day. The drop registered on Thursday of the ﬁrst week was caused 
by an outage. More than 16 000 students connect to at least one virtual 
classroom on a daily basis. Considering that around 35 000 students 
are registered at the university, and some join a few lectures a day, 
a large percentage of the community engages in online teaching each 
day. The trend on active classrooms and students is stable over time, 
suggesting that students and faculty found the virtual teaching platform 
appropriate. This is conﬁrmed by the feedback students leave at the end 
of each class which sees more than 70% of students giving a feedback 
of 4 or 5 stars (5 being the highest rating) to the technical quality of the 
session. 
Interestingly, 47% of classes have been followed by students outside 
Piedmont, where PoliTO resides. Some students have indeed returned to 
their home countries or regions before the start of the second semester 
and could not return to Torino because of the lockdown. Other statistics 
show that most students follow classes using a Windows 10 PC (64.5%) 
or Mac OS X (14.1%), and Chrome (71%), Safari (10.1%) or Firefox 
(9.9%) browser. Yet, 6.2% and 2.4% of students follow the class from 
an Android or iOS device, respectively. 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Take away: Engagement in online teaching is impressively high during 
the COVID-19 emergency, with a large part of the academic community par- 
ticipating on a daily basis. Virtual classrooms allowed students to follow 
classes, with almost 50% of them connecting from outside Piedmont. 
4.2. Network workload 
How much massive online teaching costs in terms of network traﬃc? 
Clearly, the answer to this question depends on the technical parameters 
of the online teaching environment. PoliTO’s infrastructure includes the 
deployment of teaching tools for (i) virtual classroom; (ii) on-demand 
video of pre-recorded classes (stored as 720p video); (iii) other teach- 
ing material (e.g., slides, teachers’ notes, other useful ﬁles). The virtual 
classroom service allows the students to watch a live video of the lec- 
turer, an optional whiteboard as well as the direct sharing of the lec- 
turer’s screen. The BBB platform uses dedicated servers and WebRTC to 
set up multiple RTP streams that carry the live video and audio. On- 
demand video and teaching material are instead oﬀered by additional 
servers as standard HTTP downloads. 
Fig. 6 a details the traﬃc volume for each service during the fourth 
week of March. The ﬁgure reports the average bitrate of the traﬃc leav- 
ing the Campus – i.e., from the servers to the clients, for each hour. 
During weekdays, the total bitrate exceeds 1 Gbit/s, with live streaming 
of classes responsible for a bit more than one third of the traﬃc. During 
the weekend, when no lecture is scheduled, we still observe large traf- 
ﬁc (up to 750 Mbit/s) due to students downloading on-demand lectures 
and teaching material. Virtual classroom traﬃc starts and ends within 
the schedule, while students keep accessing on-demand classroom and 
material also at night. 
Fig. 6 b shows how the accesses to teaching facilities are distributed 
over the day. We take the start time of each student connection to a 
teaching server and plot the number of new connections observed every 
ﬁve minutes. Accesses to live classrooms (red solid line) clearly follow 
the schedule of the campus lectures, which begin every 90 minutes, from 
8:30 AM until 7 PM. When lectures begin, thousands of students start a 
new session with the live classrooms servers, resulting in peaks of more 
Fig. 6. Access pattern to the teaching services. 
than 4 500 connections. Diﬀerent is the case for on-demand classrooms 
and teaching material (blue and green dashed lines, respectively), whose 
consumption is spread over the day. As said above, students download 
such material also late in the evenings, including sizeable accesses even 
after midnight. 
We complement the above picture with Fig. 7 , in which we show 
diﬀerent characteristics of the virtual classroom sessions. Using logs ex- 
ported by Tstat, we analyze the RTP streams that serve multimedia con- 
tent (audio and video) to the students and report the distribution of the 
per-ﬂow average bitrate in Fig. 7 a, separately per audio and video. 10 
All classes carry an audio track, with 40 kbit/s average bitrate – the 
expected VoIP bitrate according to the BBB conﬁguration. Considering 
video, we observe that lecturers usually select the medium quality at 
100 kbit/s, but we observe a considerable amount of streams at 50 kbit/s 
(low quality) and 200 kbit/s (high quality). Remind that PoliTO setup 
allows four quality levels, as explained in Section 2.3 . In only 10% of 
the cases, streams reach 300 kbit/s or higher, meaning that ultra-high 
quality video and screen sharing are seldom used. In all cases, band- 
width is not a major problem for BBB, and students need no more than 
0.5-1.0 Mbit/s to enjoy a lecture. 
At last, we consider session duration in Fig. 7 b. Half of the streams 
last less than 30 minutes, but it is hard to link this short duration to 
abandonment by students, as the server could reset multimedia streams 
for other reasons (e.g., the lecturer temporarily mutes the microphone, 
or takes a break during a class). Interestingly, we still notice two bumps 
at 1.5 and 3 hours, which are the typical duration of PoliTO classes. 
Take away: Live classrooms put a large workload on teaching servers 
with signiﬁcant peaks on scheduled lecture times. Yet, bandwidth is not a 
major problem. Students need less than 1 Mbit/s downstream bandwidth to 
fully enjoy live lectures. Not-live teaching media are heavily consumed also 
during evenings and weekends. 
5. Network performance 
We now evaluate network performance metrics to understand 
whether people accessing teaching material experience problems to ob- 
tain the content. We ﬁrst investigate the performance by breaking down 
data according to the students’ Internet Service Providers (ISPs). Then, 
we break down ﬁgures according to the geographical region from where 
students connect. In both cases, we map their ISPs and regions using the 
MaxMind datasets. 11 Results in this section are computed by considering 
the downloads of on-demand video or teaching material with TCP con- 
nections. Both contents are provided through HTTP bulk transfers and 
thus constitute a valid download performance test. To reduce noise, we 
consider only download of objects of at least 10 MB. 
5.1. Internet service providers breakdown 
Fig. 8 a shows the distribution of the number of connections accord- 
ing to the ISPs hosting the client IP addresses. As expected, the largest 
4 ISPs in Italy dominate the list, with TIM grabbing 31% of the connec- 
tions, followed by Vodafone, Fastweb and Wind Tre getting 20%–15% of 
the share. Some ISPs rely on speciﬁc access technologies. For instance, 
EOLO, Linkem, and Free Mobile oﬀer Internet over 3G/4G technologies 
only. Would students using them suﬀer eventual impairments? 
For this, we check the distribution of download throughput for each 
ISP. Violin plots in Fig. 8 b depict results. Each violin plot represents the 
probability density function of the average per-ﬂow throughput; White 
dots mark the median values of distributions. We sort providers by this 
median. Most ﬂows experience average throughput higher than 5 Mb/s. 
For example, the median on Fastweb customers (a provider oﬀering 
10 RTP streams are deﬁned by the combination of endpoint addresses and port 
numbers, plus the SSRC stream identiﬁer. We distinguish audio and video using 
the RTP Payload Type ﬁeld. 
11 https://www.maxmind.com/ . 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 7. Characteristics of virtual classroom sessions. 
Fig. 8. Access to teaching servers per ISP. Only 
ﬂows larger than 10 MB are considered. 
mostly ﬁber access solution) is as high as 10 Mbit/s. Figures for 3G/4G- 
only providers are, instead, below 5 Mbit/s, thus pointing to possible 
client-side impairment (e.g., congestion). 
Fig. 8 c provides more insights. The violin plots depict the distribu- 
tions of the minimum RTT which Tstat computes by measuring the time 
between a data segment and its corresponding acknowledgment. RTT 
is impacted (i) by the physical distance from clients to servers, (ii) by 
access technology delays and network congestion, and (iii) Internet rout- 
ing. Notice how the RTT distribution is very condensed for Fastweb (me- 
dian at around 20 ms). On the other extreme, wireless-only providers 
have widespread distributions, with a median over 40 ms, and peaks 
above 100 ms (see Free Mobile as the clearest example). Fig. 8 d extends 
the analysis showing a per-ﬂow comparison of RTT versus through- 
put for two providers. The low RTT for the (ﬁber-most) customers on 
Fastweb comes together with a large throughput. The more variable 
3G/4G network on Free Mobile results in higher and more distributed 
RTT and lower throughput. In extreme cases, very large RTT values 
together with very low throughput are symptoms of possible network 
congestion. 
Take away: Despite the variability of results, the very large majority 
of Italian ISPs can easily meet the roughly 1 Mbit/s required to enjoy live- 
streaming classes. Only a few customers, in particular those relying on 3G/4G 
access technologies, may suﬀer large delays and limited throughput with po- 
tential to disturb the user experience. 
5.2. Geographical characteristics 
We repeat the performance analysis considering the geographical re- 
gion from where students connect to the online teaching system. Stu- 
dents in some countries 12 are reported to have problems following on- 
line lectures due to poor Internet connectivity. Whereas we cannot mea- 
sure the number of students suﬀering from a total lack of connectivity, 
we can estimate whether PoliTO’s students and faculty experience dif- 
ferent performance when connecting from diﬀerent regions of Italy. 
12 https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/23/us-students- 
are-being-asked-to-work-remotely-but-22-of-homes-dont-have-internet . 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 9. Access to teaching material per Italian region. Only ﬂows larger than 
10 MB are considered. 
Fig. 9 visually reports the number of ﬂows per Italian region. Again, 
we consider only connections downloading at least 10 MB. We can see 
that people have connected to the teaching system from all Italian re- 
gions. Naturally, a larger number of connections is seen for Piedmont, 
where PoliTO is located – the region marked in dark-blue in northwest- 
ern Italy. Still, signiﬁcant numbers of students are seen in other regions, 
allowing us to make fair comparisons. 
Fig. 10 compares performance metrics for connections coming for the 
several Italian regions. We use violin plots once again, and sort regions 
in the 𝑥 − 𝑎𝑥𝑒𝑠 from the best to the worst median value for the metric 
in each plot. Fig. 10 a presents the distributions of RTT. Here physical 
distance is expected to play a key role. Yet, interesting patterns emerge. 
First, note that connections from Latium (the region where Rome is lo- 
cated) typically experience lower RTT than connections from Piedmont. 
This is an artifact due to Internet routing: Most Internet providers peer 
Fig. 10. RTT and throughput distributions (ﬂows larger than 10 MB) per Italian 
region. 
Fig. 11. Variations in the number of events reported by the university ﬁrewall 
between February and March 2020. 
with GARR via Internet exchanges in Rome or Milan. This aspect causes 
routing detours that artiﬁcially increase RTT for all regions, but Latium 
and in part Lombardy. Second, whereas southern regions are penalized 
by their distance to PoliTO, much noisier RTT distributions are seen for 
some northern regions. Observe, for example, that Veneto and Emilia- 
Romagna, two economically strong regions in northern Italian, have a 
large portion of connections with larger RTT than the median connec- 
tion from Sicily (an island in southern Italy). This reﬂects again the 
diﬀerent mix of access technologies and Internet routing of ISPs. 
Fig. 10 b depicts distribution of the average connection throughput. 
We can see a large diﬀerence in throughput for the diﬀerent regions. 
Connections coming from the best-performing regions have median av- 
erage throughput twice as high as the regions with the lowest ﬁgures. 
Observe how some regions with large median RTT, such as Sicily and 
Friuli-Venezia-Giulia, still present good throughput ﬁgures. These re- 
sults suggest that their large RTTs are mostly due to physical and routing 
distances rather than congestion. In some cases, large RTT variations, 
such as those observed for Veneto, are coupled with low throughput 
ﬁgures, which result in low Internet quality for a sizeable percentage of 
customers. 
Take away: While some people reported limited Internet performance 
due to traﬃc increase after COVID-19 lockdown [1 , 2] , our data show that 
overall performance is still good to access online teaching. Physical/routing 
distance has little impact in general, with Internet access technology that is 
still critical for ﬂow performance. 
6. Security events and unsolicited traﬃc 
Finally, we check events visible from PoliTO’s network security mon- 
itoring solutions. Our goal is to gauge evidence of possible changes in 
malicious network activities during the lockdown. 
In Fig. 11 we report the variation on the number of events reported 
by the university ﬁrewall per week. The ﬁrst week is taken as a refer- 
ence. The three most common events are shown, namely scan/brute- 
force attacks against SIP, RDP and SSH. The numbers for SIP and SSH 
show little variation throughout the weeks. These small variations are 
in line with the normal operations of this ﬁrewall. For RDP, some signif- 
icant changes appear in the week of March 16 th . Indeed, the number of 
RDP events reported by the ﬁrewall has more than doubled in the ﬁrst 
week of lockdown. Recall that many RDP servers were enabled during 
that week for easing smart working. Yet, this increase is a consequence 
of the deployment of the new systems and would happen even without 
the lockdown. As potential attackers have found new RDP servers on- 
line, they perform more scanning and brute-force activity against these 
nodes, too. The posterior decrease in RDP events is explained by changes 
in the ﬁrewall setup, performed to limit such scan activity. 
A close inspection of traces of the darknet deployed at PoliTO leads 
to similar remarks. Fig. 12 shows the variations in the number of packets 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
Fig. 12. Variation in the darknet traﬃc between January and March 2020. 
reaching the most contacted ports of the darknet. Traﬃc reaching the 
darknet is always noisy and great variations are normally seen when 
new large-scale Internet scans are performed [5] . We observe precisely 
this typical pattern during the weeks of lockdown as during any other 
period of time. We indeed observe episodes of sudden increases for some 
particular ports (e.g., port TCP/23 used by Telnet). However, there is no 
evident correlation among these variations and the lockdown itself. 
At last, we check the load on email servers, but we omit ﬁgures for 
brevity. We observe a clear decreasing trend in SPAM emails. While 
the trend seems more prominent during March, the decrease has started 
months before. Again, there is no evidence that the reduction in SPAM 
would be a consequence of the lockdown. 
Take away: We observed little changes in unsolicited traﬃc, SPAM 
email and other security-related events. There are no clear signals that the 
most signiﬁcant events are a consequence of the lockdown. 
7. Related work 
The impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on the Internet ecosystem has 
been immediately measured by ISPs, content providers and specialized 
enterprises and published in the form of reports, news and blog posts. 
SimilarWeb, a company that provides web analytics services for busi- 
nesses, shows how the habits of people shifted during the outbreak [6] , 
with some sectors like air travel, hotels and car rentals witnessing a large 
reduction of accesses while others (e-commerce, food delivery, and so- 
cial networks) increased their popularity. Microsoft reported a 755% 
increase in usage of its cloud services [7] , while YouTube and NetFlix 
reduced the streaming quality in Europe to prevent overload on the net- 
work [8] . CloudFlare and Fastly, two of the largest Content Delivery 
Networks worldwide, report a 20–40% increase in daily traﬃc since the 
lockdown in Italy [1,2] , with somehow reduced performance. Consid- 
ering ISPs, the surge of network traﬃc has been testiﬁed with public 
news and blog articles. Vodafone states that ﬁxed broadband usage has 
increased by more than 50% in Italy and Spain [9] , with a 100% surge 
in upstream traﬃc and 44% for downstream. Telefonica IP networks 
experienced a traﬃc increase of close to 40% while mobile voice use 
increased by about 50% and 25% in the case of data [10] . Also Euro- 
pean Internet Exchange Points measured an increase of traﬃc in the 
order of 10–40% [11,12] . Outside Europe, Comcast, one of the largest 
US operators, reports a 32% increase in upstream traﬃc growth and 
an 18% increase in downstream traﬃc growth [13] . In this work, we 
complement the above reports with additional ﬁgures showing the im- 
pact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Campus networks and e-learning 
facilities. 
Considering research papers, speciﬁc works targeting the eﬀects of 
the COVID-19 pandemic have not yet been published. However, the role 
of the Internet has already been studied for the past catastrophic events. 
Cho et al. [14] study the impact of the 2011 earthquake in Japan on 
traﬃc and routing observed by a local ISP, while Liu et al. [14] focus 
on inter-domain rerouting analyzing BGP data. Zhuo et al. [15] under- 
line the importance of the Internet during the 2011 Egyptian Revolt, 
while Groshek [16] ﬁnds statistical evidence that the Internet and mo- 
bile phones have helped to facilitate sociopolitical instability. Dainotti 
et al. [17] further address this aspect by analyzing the internet outages 
due to censorship actions that occurred during the Arab Spring revolts. 
Heidemann et al. [18] analyze network outages during the 2012 Sandy 
hurricane in the US. Sudden variations of Internet traﬃc have been ob- 
served also during massive software updates or following the born of 
new services (e.g., NetFlix) or protocols (e.g., Google QUIC) [19–21] . 
Finally, some works propose general techniques to study or improve 
Internet traﬃc during disruptive events [22–24] . The events connected 
with the COVID-19 pandemic have a global scale and forced an unprece- 
dented number of people to suddenly change their habits. As such, it 
is of great interest to study the impact on the Internet, and this paper 
provides an in-depth analysis of the Campus network traﬃc before and 
during the outbreak. 
8. Conclusions 
To mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, the world issued 
severe restrictions like social distancing and lockdown measures. This 
forced people to change their habits and pushed them to online services 
for learning, smart working and leisure, generating an unprecedented 
load on the Internet. Since March 11 th and still at the time of writing, 
Italy is facing a total lockdown, with 80–90% of people forced to stay 
at home. 
In this paper, we took the perspective of the Politecnico di Torino 
campus, analyzing the changes in traﬃc patterns due to the lockdown 
measures and the switch to online collaboration and e-learning solu- 
tions. We observe that incoming traﬃc drastically decreased, while out- 
going traﬃc has more than doubled to support online learning. 
Remote working and online collaboration exploded as well, with 
hundreds of staﬀmembers using the Microsoft Teams collaboration plat- 
form, VPN and remote desktop services to keep working from home. 
Since then PoliTO’s in-house e-teaching infrastructure is serving more 
than 600 daily classes to more than 16 000 students, generating peaks 
of 1.5 Gbit/s of traﬃc. We also looked for eventual impairment suﬀered 
by students using diﬀerent ISPs, or connecting from diﬀerent regions. 
Results show that the campus and the Internet have proved robust to 
successfully cope with challenges and maintain the university opera- 
tions. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Thomas Favale: Software, Validation, Writing - original draft. 
Francesca Soro: Data curation, Visualization, Writing - original draft. 
Martino Trevisan: Data curation, Conceptualization, Writing - original 
draft. Idilio Drago: Project administration, Formal analysis, Writing - 
review & editing. Marco Mellia: Project administration, Formal analy- 
sis, Writing - review & editing. 
Acknowledgements 
The research leading to these results has been funded by the Smart- 
Data@PoliTO center for Big Data technologies. We would like to thank 
PoliTO’s IT Department “Area IT ” and in particular Enrico Venuto and 
Giorgio Santiano for providing the data and precious support for the 
analyses. 

T. Favale, F. Soro and M. Trevisan et al. 
Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107290 
References 
[1] CloudFlare, On the shoulders of giants: recent changes in internet traﬃc, 2020 
[2] Fastly, How COVID-19 is aﬀecting internet performance, 2020. 
[3] M. Trevisan , A. Finamore , M. Mellia , M. Munafo , D. Rossi , Traﬃc analysis with 
oﬀ-the-shelf hardware: challenges and lessons learned, IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 (3) 
(2017) 163–169 . 
[4] J. Fan , J. Xu , M.H. Ammar , Crypto-pan: cryptography-based preﬁx-preserving 
anonymization, Comput. Networks 46 (2) (2004) . 
[5] F. Soro , I. Drago , M. Trevisan , M. Mellia , J. Ceron , J. J. Santanna , Are darknets all 
the same? On darknet visibility for security monitoring, in: 2019 IEEE International 
Symposium on Local and Metropolitan Area Networks (LANMAN), 2019, pp. 1–6 . 
[6] SimilarWeb, SimilarWeb coronavirus data & insights hub, 2020. 
[7] Microsoft, Update #2 on microsoft cloud services continuity, 2020. 
[8] CNN, Netﬂix and youtube are slowing down in Europe to keep the internet from 
breaking, 2020. 
[9] Vodafone, An update on vodafone’s networks, 2020. 
[10] Telefonica, Operators advise a rational and responsible use of telecommunication 
networks to cope with traﬃc increases, 2020. 
[11] AMS-IX, 17% traﬃc increase on the AMS-IX platform due to Corona/COVID-19 cri- 
sis, 2020. 
[12] NAMEX, Covid-19 emergency: One month after, 2020. 
[13] Comcast, Covid-19 network update, 2020. 
[14] K. Cho , C. Pelsser , R. Bush , Y. Won , The japan earthquake: the impact on traﬃc and 
routing observed by a local ISP, in: Proceedings of the Special Workshop on Internet 
and Disasters, 2011, pp. 1–8 . 
[15] X. Zhuo , B. Wellman , J. Yu , Egypt: the ﬁrst internet revolt? Boletim do tempo pre- 
sente (02) (2012) . 
[16] J. Groshek , Forecasting and observing: a cross-methodological consideration of in- 
ternet and mobile phone diﬀusion in the Egyptian revolt, Int. Commun. Gazette 74 
(8) (2012) 750–768 . 
[17] A. Dainotti , C. Squarcella , E. Aben , K.C. Claﬀy , M. Chiesa , M. Russo , A. Pescapé, 
Analysis of country-wide internet outages caused by censorship, in: Proceedings of 
the 2011 ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement Conference, 2011, 
pp. 1–18 . 
[18] J. Heidemann , L. Quan , Y. Pradkin , A Preliminary Analysis of Network Outages 
during Hurricane Sandy, University of Southern California, Information Sciences 
Institute, 2012 . 
[19] A. Finamore , M. Mellia , M. Meo , M.M. Munafo , P. Di Torino , D. Rossi , Experiences 
of internet traﬃc monitoring with tstat, IEEE Netw. 25 (3) (2011) 8–14 . 
[20] J. Rüth , I. Poese , C. Dietzel , O. Hohlfeld , A ﬁrst look at quic in the wild, in: Inter- 
national Conference on Passive and Active Network Measurement, Springer, 2018, 
pp. 255–268 . 
[21] M. Trevisan , D. Giordano , I. Drago , M.M. Munaf , M. Mellia , Five years at the edge: 
watching internet from the ISP network, IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking 28 (2) (2020) 
561–574 . 
[22] M.P. Mackrell , K.J. Twilley , W.P. Kirk , L.Q. Lu , J.L. Underhill , L.E. Barnes , Discov- 
ering anomalous patterns in network traﬃc data during crisis events, in: 2013 IEEE 
Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium, IEEE, 2013, pp. 52–57 . 
[23] R. Teixeira , J. Rexford , Managing routing disruptions in internet service provider 
networks, IEEE Commun. Mag. 44 (3) (2006) 160–165 . 
[24] Y. Liu , X. Luo , R.K. Chang , J. Su , Characterizing inter-domain rerouting by between- 
ness centrality after disruptive events, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 31 (6) (2013) 
1147–1157 . 
Thomas Favale comes from Brindisi and was born on April 
1st, 1994. He got his Master Degree in Computer Engineering, 
specializing in the network branch, in 2019 at Politecnico di 
Torino. From May 2019 he started the Ph.D. at Politecnico di 
Torino under the supervision of Professor Marco Mellia, join- 
ing the Interdepartmental Centre for Smart Data. His research 
interests focus on traﬃc anonymization. 
Francesca Soro received her Bachelor and Master Degree at 
Politecnico di Torino, Italy. She is currently pursuing a PhD in 
Electrical, Electronics and Communications Engineering at the 
SmartData@PoliTO Interdepartmental Centre. Her research 
interests focus on the application of Machine Learning to the 
cybersecurity and network traﬃc monitoring ﬁelds. 
Martino Trevisan received his PhD in 2019 from Politecnico 
di Torino, Italy. He is currently a assistant professor (RTD-A) 
at the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications in 
the same university. He has been collaborating in both Indus- 
try and European projects and spent six months in Telecom 
ParisTech, France working on High-Speed Traﬃc Monitoring 
during his M.Sc. He visited twice Cisco labs in San Jose in sum- 
mer 2016 and 2017, as well as AT&T labs during fall 2018. 
Idilio Drago is an Assistant Professor (RTD-B) at the Uni- 
versity of Turin, Italy, in the Computer Science Department. 
His research interests include Internet measurements, Big Data 
analysis, and network security. Drago has a PhD in computer 
science from the University of Twente. He was awarded an 
Applied Networking Research Prize in 2013 by the IETF/IRTF 
for his work on cloud storage traﬃc analysis. 
Marco Mellia is a full professor at the Politecnico di Torino 
and his research interests are in the in the area of traﬃc mon- 
itoring and analysis, in cyber monitoring, and Big Data an- 
alytics. Marco Mellia has co-authored over 250 papers pub- 
lished in international journals and presented in leading in- 
ternational conferences. He won the IRTF ANR Prize at IETF- 
88, and best paper award at IEEE P2P’12, ACM CoNEXT’13, 
IEEE ICDCS’15. He is part of the editorial board of ACM/IEEE 
Transactions on Networking, IEEE Transactions on Network 
and Service Management, and ACM Computer Communica- 
tion Review. 


============================================================
FILE: roller2001telecommunications.pdf
============================================================
Telecommunications Infrastructure and Economic
Development: A Simultaneous Approach
By LARS-HENDRIK RO¨LLER AND LEONARD WAVERMAN*
In this paper we investigate how telecommunications infrastructure affects eco-
nomic growth. We use evidence from 21 OECD countries over a 20-year period to
examine the impacts that telecommunications developments may have had. We
jointly estimate a micromodel for telecommunication investment with a macro
production function. We ﬁnd evidence of a signiﬁcant positive causal link, especially
when a critical mass of telecommunications infrastructure is present. Interestingly,
the critical mass appears to be at a level of telecommunications infrastructure that
is near universal service. (JEL O57, O47, L69)
Explaining the sources of economic growth
ranks among the most signiﬁcant issues that
economists have examined. Paul M. Romer’s
1986 work began a set of theoretical and em-
pirical analyses focusing on the endogeneity of
the growth process as compared to Solow-type
neoclassical growth models (Robert M. Solow,
1956), which use an aggregate production func-
tion approach and exogenous technical changes.
Numerous papers since then have attempted to
disentangle those elements of a national econ-
omy that create growth [see, for instance, Phil-
ippe Aghion and Peter Howitt (1998)]. Many of
these
papers
have
examined
empirically
whether economic growth is converging rela-
tive to the United States and what the forces are
that may lead to convergence [see, e.g., J. Brad-
ford De Long and Lawrence H. Summers (1991,
1993), Robert J. Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
(1992); and N. Gregory Mankiw et al. (1992)].
Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman
(1994) survey the recent literature on the deter-
minants of economic growth and divide these
works into three types: one set considers the
accumulation of “broad” capital, including hu-
man capital and different types of physical cap-
ital. A second set of papers utilizes spillovers or
external economies, and ﬁnally a third set “casts
industrial innovation as the engine of growth.”1
This paper investigates how telecommunica-
tions infrastructure affects economic growth.
This issue is important and has received consid-
erable attention in the popular press concerning
the creation of the “information superhighway”
and its potential impacts on the economy. We
use evidence from 21 OECD countries over 20
years to examine the impacts that telecommu-
nications developments may have had.
Telecommunications
infrastructure
invest-
ment can lead to economic growth in several
ways. Most obviously, investing in telecommu-
nications infrastructure does itself lead to
growth because its products—cable, switches,
and so forth—lead to increases in the demand
for the goods and services used in their produc-
tion. In addition, the economic returns to tele-
communications infrastructure investment are
* Ro¨ller: Research Area IV/2, Wissenschaftszentrum
Berlin (WZB), Reichpietschufer 50, 10785 Berlin, Ger-
many, Humboldt University, and INSEAD; Waverman: De-
partment of Economics, London Business School, London
NW1 YSA, England, and University of Toronto. We thank
two anonymous referees for their comments and sugges-
tions. This research was produced as part of a CEPR re-
search network on The Evolution of Market Structure in
Network Industries, funded by the European Commission
under the Training and Mobility of Researchers Program
(contract #ERBFMRXCT980203). Ro¨ller gratefully ac-
knowledges ﬁnancial support from the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for this project. Financial
assistance from the OECD and INSEAD during earlier
stages of this research is also gratefully acknowledged. We
speciﬁcally thank Dimitri Ypsalanti and Paul Wijdicks of
the OECD for providing us with much of the telecommu-
nications data, and Andreas Stephan for excellent research
assistance. All remaining errors are ours.
1 See also Danny Quah (1993a, b), who criticizes the
entire set of empirical studies that examine whether long-
term growth is converging for a number of countries.
909

much greater than the returns on just the tele-
communication investment itself. Where the
state of the telephone system is rudimentary,
communications between ﬁrms is limited. The
transaction costs of ordering, gathering infor-
mation, and searching for services are high. As
the telephone system improves, the costs of
doing business fall, and output will increase for
individual ﬁrms in individual sectors of the
economy. “If the telephone does have an impact
on a nation’s economy, it will be through the
improvement of the capabilities of managers to
communicate with each other rapidly over in-
creased distances” (Andrew Hardy, 1980 p.
279). Thus, telecommunications infrastructure
investment and the derived services provide sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁts; their presence allows produc-
tive units to produce better. The ability to
communicate at will increases the ability of
ﬁrms to engage in new productive activities.2
Moreover, the importance of this effect in-
creases as the information intensity of the
production process increases. Thus, telecommu-
nication investments might lead to beneﬁts in
other sectors. In suggesting that a country’s
telecommunications infrastructure has strong
effects on economic growth, it has been argued
that telecommunications investments have im-
portant spillovers and create externalities.3
These arguments are in fact reminiscent of
the public infrastructure debate of recent years.
Public infrastructure refers to more general “tra-
ditional infrastructures” such as transportation,
sewer systems, water, electricity, and so forth.
Early studies show [see, e.g., David Alan As-
chauer (1989)] tremendous returns to public
infrastructure investment.4 As has been pointed
out by a growing number of papers, these re-
sults are subject to a severe simultaneity bias
and spurious correlation. Once these two prob-
lems have been econometrically controlled for,
returns to infrastructure are much reduced.
Clearly, the same problems of reverse causality
and spurious correlation do potentially exist for
telecommunication infrastructure.
Reverse causality implies that one needs to
distinguish two effects: (i) the increase in eco-
nomic growth, which is attributable to increases
in telecommunications infrastructure and ser-
vices development; and (ii) the increase in the
demand for telecommunication services, which
is attributable to increases in economic growth
(i.e., the income elasticity of telecommunication
demand). The causation is clearly two-way and,
unless telecommunications infrastructure in-
vestment is modeled, the measured effect on
telecommunications infrastructure on growth
will be biased. In this paper we attempt to
estimate a simultaneous model for telecommu-
nication investments and economic growth. We
specify a structural model, which endogenizes
telecommunication investment by specifying a
micromodel of supply and demand for telecom-
munication investments. The micromodel is
then jointly estimated with the macro produc-
tion equation. In this way, we endogenize tele-
communication investment, controlling for the
simultaneity discussed earlier. The second prob-
lem of spurious correlation may arise because
regional
speciﬁc
infrastructure
investments
might be correlated with other growth promot-
ing measures like R&D investments, investment
in human capital, taxes, and so forth. To control
for these correlations we will allow for country-
speciﬁc ﬁxed effects.
This paper concentrates on telecommunica-
tion infrastructure and its impact on economic
2 Nathaniel H. Leff (1984) argues that telecommunica-
tions lowers the ﬁxed and variable costs of information
acquisition. An expansion of the telecommunications net-
work generates cost savings externalities to other markets.
These externalities involve lower costs of search, an in-
creased ability to arbitrage, and increased information on
the distribution of prices and services, all leading to lower
transactions costs and more efﬁcient operation of the tele-
communications, using markets. Leff shows that ﬁrms can
have more physically dispersed activities as telecommuni-
cations increases, and adds that X-inefﬁciency will be
lower.
3 It is a common conception that a modern communica-
tions system is essential to development. Studies by the
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 1987,
The Telecommunication Industry: Growth and Structural
Change; by the International Telecommunications Union,
Geneva, 1980, Information, Telecommunications and De-
velopment; and by R. J. Saunders, J. J. Warford, and B.
Wellenius, 1983, for the World Bank and the Brundland
Commission, Telecommunications and Economic Develop-
ment all attest to the need to have a modern efﬁcient
telecommunications sector as part of a nation’s basic infra-
structure and as a precursor to economic growth.
4 Aschauer found that the return to infrastructure could
be as high as 70 percent per year. This would imply that $1
million invested over 30 years would result in a return of
almost $5 trillion.
910
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

output. Clearly, telecommunication infrastruc-
ture is intrinsically different from other types
of infrastructure: information highways are
different from transportation highways. One
seemingly important characteristic of telecom-
munication technologies, which is not present in
other types of infrastructure, is network exter-
nalities: the more users, the more value is de-
rived by those users.5
Given that these network externalities are not
equally present in public infrastructure in gen-
eral, one might expect that telecommunication
infrastructure investments lead to higher growth
effects than what has been found for the other
types of infrastructures. Another implication of
such network externalities is that the impact of
telecommunication infrastructure on growth
might not be linear, in that the growth impact
might be larger whenever a signiﬁcant network
size is achieved. This would imply that positive
growth effects might be subject to having
achieved a critical mass in a given country’s
communications infrastructure.
A relevant question to ask then is whether
such nonlinearities in telecommunications do
exist, and if so, what is the critical mass. Our
empirical analysis below attempts to answer
such questions. In addition, it will be interesting
to compare the public infrastructure results to
those obtained for telecommunication infra-
structure, especially given the importance for
public policy in this area.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II
brieﬂy summarizes other related studies; the
data and some simple correlations are discussed
in Section III; Section IV speciﬁes the econo-
metric model with the results and interpreta-
tions in Section V; Section VI concludes.
I. Previous Related Studies
To address the impact of infrastructure in-
vestments on economic performance it is nec-
essary to differentiate between various types of
infrastructure. It is clear that the effect of tele-
communication and information technology in-
frastructure
on
productivity
and
economic
growth are potentially very different from that
of other types of infrastructures. Given the im-
portance for public policy in this area, it will be
interesting to compare the public infrastructure
results to those obtained for telecommunication
infrastructure. In what follows we ﬁrst discuss
the available evidence for general infrastructure
investment and then survey several studies that
investigate the impact of telecommunication
and
information
technology
on
economic
performance.
There are several studies that address the
returns to public infrastructure investments. An
inﬂuential study by Aschauer (1989) estimates a
production function on time-series data and
ﬁnds a very large contribution of infrastructure
to output. Aschauer suggested that the stock of
public infrastructure capital is indeed a signif-
icant determinant of total factor productivity
growth. He also found a striking relationship
between the U.S. productivity growth slow-
down and the decline in the rate of growth of the
public capital stock. These early estimates did
have a bi-important impact on the public policy
debate in the United States, in that infrastructure
is often cited as an answer to the employment
problem.
Unfortunately, these early empirical results
appear to collapse once more sophisticated
econometric procedures are used.6 The As-
chauer model constitutes a classical produc-
tion function approach and can be criticized
as not accounting for the appropriate causal-
ities and correlations. For example the work
by T. Garcia-Mila and T. J. McGuire (1992)
and Douglas Holtz-Eakin (1993, 1994) dem-
onstrates that the introduction of state-level
ﬁxed effects reduces the returns dramatically.
Similar results are obtained by Harry H. Kele-
jian and Dennis P. Robinson (1994) and Alfredo
M. Pereira and Rafael Flores de Frutos (1995),
which use other econometric corrections. Using
a cost function model, M. Ishaq Nadiri and
Theofanis P. Mamuneas (1996) show that the
returns to public infrastructure are comparable
to those of private investments. Charles R.
Hulten and Robert M. Schwab [(1984); see also
their 1991 study] estimate a production function
5 For instance, in transportation infrastructures no such
(positive) network externality exists. In fact, there might be
signiﬁcant negative network externalities present in trans-
portation resulting from congestion.
6 For a survey of the infrastructure literature see Alicia
H. Munnell (1992) and Edward M. Grammlich (1994).
911
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

for the manufacturing sector on state-level data.
They found that most of the cross-state variation
in value-added growth was explained by varia-
tions in the rate of private and capital accumu-
lation, leading them to suggest that public
infrastructure capital was irrelevant in explain-
ing differences in productivity growth. Manuel
Balmaseda (1996) argues that the results found
by Aschauer can be explained by simultaneity
and aggregation biases. He shows that the large
positive effects of public investment on growth
can be reduced to zero, if causality and aggre-
gation biases are accounted for. Hulten (1994)
offers several explanations for this empirical
ﬁnding of zero return on public infrastructure.
More recently, John G. Fernald (1999) investi-
gates the relationship between infrastructure (as
measured by roads) and productivity. He ﬁnds
that road building explains much of the produc-
tivity slowdown through a one-time unrepeat-
able productivity boost in the 1950’s and
1960’s.
Thus, the available evidence regarding the
returns from public infrastructure appears to be
that the original high returns do not hold up
once a number of econometric measures are
employed. We now turn to studies that focus
directly on the effect of telecommunication in-
frastructures on economic output [for evidence
on the positive growth effects of information
technology investments see, e.g., Frank Licht-
enberg (1995)].
Despite the obvious policy relevance, there
are far fewer studies that concentrate on the
speciﬁc role of telecommunication investment
on economic growth and development. As in
the research discussed earlier, even fewer stud-
ies address the causality between telecommuni-
cation investments and growth. As expected,
telecommunications infrastructure investments
(or stocks) are correlated with economic growth
[see also Ro¨ller and Waverman (1996)]. This
evidence, however, does not imply that there is
a causal relationship. As a consequence, policy
suggestions for increased infrastructure invest-
ments based on this kind of evidence are with-
out merit.
Hardy (1980) is one of the ﬁrst studies we are
aware of that investigates the potential impact
of telecommunication on growth. Using data for
over 15 developed and 45 developing nations
from 1960 to 1973, Hardy regresses GDP per
capita on lagged GDP per capita, lagged tele-
phones per capita, and the number of (lagged)
radios. He concludes that telephones per capita
signiﬁcantly impacts the GDP, whereas the
spread of radio does not. However, when the
regression is attempted for developed and de-
veloping economies separately, no signiﬁcant
effects occur. One explanation of this might be
that there are important ﬁxed effects. Neither
ﬁxed effects nor the problem of reverse causal-
ity was addressed by Hardy.
A more complete analysis of the telecommu-
nication economic growth relationship is pro-
vided by S. W. Norton (1992). Using data from
47 countries for the period of 1957–1977, he
estimates the effect of the average stock of
telephones between 1957 and 1977 on the mean
annual growth rate, controlling for the stock of
telephones in 1957 and a number of macroeco-
nomic variables. Norton ﬁnds that the telecom-
munication variable is positive and signiﬁcant
and concludes that the existence of telecommu-
nications infrastructure reduces transactions
costs because output rises “when the infrastruc-
ture is present.” Because the beginning period
telephone stock is signiﬁcantly related to sub-
sequent growth, Norton argues that the relation-
ship “is clearly not due to reverse causality.”7
Norton also estimates the higher growth rates
that Burma, Honduras, Sri Lanka, and Bolivia
would have had given the estimated coefﬁcients
and either Mexico’s or Canada’s telephone pen-
etration rates. He ﬁnds extremely high impacts
and states it is “implausible that Burma could or
would have increased its investment-income
rate by 55.5% and its growth rate by roughly the
same amount simply by increasing its stock of
telephones to a level comparable with Mexico’s
stock.” One explanation is that many growth
effects are being captured by the telecommuni-
cation variables, including the growth of all the
industries that telecommunications encourages.
7 Norton also estimates a simpler equation for 78 coun-
tries for the 1970–1980 and 1960–1980 periods. Only four
right-hand-side variables are included: initial year income
per capita, the standard deviation of real output, TELPOP,
and a dummy variable for centrally planned economies.
Again the coefﬁcient on TELPOP is positive and signiﬁ-
cant, “... consistent with the view that the stock of telecom-
munications
lowers
transaction
costs
and
stimulates
economic growth.”
912
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

This is similar to the state-level ﬁxed effects in
the public infrastructure literature.
Finally, Shane Greenstein and Pablo T.
Spiller (1996) investigate the impact of tele-
communication infrastructure (as measured by
the amount of ﬁber-optic cable and ISDN lines)
on
economic
performance
in
the
United
States. They ﬁnd that infrastructure invest-
ment is responsible for a substantial fraction
of the recent growth in consumer surplus and
business revenue in local telecommunications
services.
In sum, the preceding studies provide some
evidence that telecommunications investment
has positive effects on output. However, most of
these studies use single equation models. In
contrast to the above-cited papers, we estimate
a more structural model, which endogenizes
telecommunication investment by specifying a
micromodel of supply and demand for telecom-
munication investments. The micromodel is
then jointly estimated with the macroproduction
equation. This is important because infrastruc-
ture investment affects many other sectors, thus
making a macro-level growth analysis neces-
sary. Moreover, as has been demonstrated by
the studies around the public infrastructure
debate, ﬁxed effects might be important. In light
of the public infrastructure experience, it would
be important for public policy to investigate
whether the positive growth effects of telecom-
munication investments hold up. Our empirical
analysis below attempts to shed some light on
this issue.
II. Data and Correlations
In this section we investigate simple corre-
lations between telecommunications infra-
structure investment and aggregate output.
Similar to other studies, we utilize data for 21
OECD countries over a 20-year period, 1970
to 1990. The 21 OECD countries are listed in
Table 1.
The data gathered consist of data on general
economic variables and country characteristics:
GDP, GDP deﬂator, capital stock, population,
CPI, gross domestic investment, gross domestic
savings, government deﬁcit (or surplus), geo-
graphic area, population density, labor force,
unemployment rate, and percentage of school-
age children in primary and in secondary
school. Most of these data are from the Robert
Summers and Alan Heston (1991) data base.
Also gathered are data on a number of char-
acteristics
of
telecommunication
develop-
ments8—mainlines,
residential
mainlines,
waiting list for mainlines, national and inter-
national trunk trafﬁc, income from telephone
services, national and international telex traf-
ﬁc, income from telex services, the number of
data terminals, circuit ends connected to
automatic
switching
exchanges,
machines
equipped for direct dialing, and investment in
telecommunication. It should be stated that
much of these data (e.g., number of data ter-
minals) are available for only a few years and
for only a few countries, typically the OECD
countries.
Using the individual country data provided
on the investment in telecommunications, we
construct the stock of telecommunications cap-
ital through the perpetual inventory method
(PIM), setting the discount rate at 10 percent.
Because we do not know the initial capital stock
of telecommunications for the year 1970 we
choose the initial stock such that the growth rate
of mainlines is consistent with the growth rate
in telecommunications capital for the period,
1970–1980.9 Given the high discount factors
usually attributed to telecommunications, the
initial stock in 1970 has virtually no effect for
the period 1980–1990. Table 2 deﬁnes the vari-
ables used in this study and presents some sum-
mary statistics.
Before turning to our model, we present some
broad averages and examine simple correla-
tions. Table 1 provides estimates for OECD
countries of the average growth rates of real
GDP per capita and mainlines per 100 inhabi-
tants, over the 1971–1990 period. The OECD
average growth rate for GDP per capita was
1.96 percent and for mainlines 3.96 percent.
Overall, real GDP is very strongly positively
associated
with
the
number
of
mainlines,
8 We are indebted to Paul Wijdicks (OECD), who was
able to acquire much of the data needed in our study.
9 More precisely, we have used a country-speciﬁc regres-
sion explaining the growth rate in capital stock of telecom in
terms of the growth rate in mainlines and other country-
speciﬁc variables using the period of 1980–1990, which is
where we have data. The estimated country-speciﬁc rela-
tionship is then applied to the period 1970–1980.
913
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

producing a correlation of .99.10,11 Given this
near total correlation between the number of
mainlines and real GDP across the OECD, it
is not surprising that regressions of GDP on
mainlines
ﬁnd
substantial
effects.
Figure
1 shows the relationship for the OECD coun-
tries for one year, 1990, between mainlines
per 100 inhabitants and real GDP per capita. A
univariate linear cross-country regression of
mainlines explains about 65 percent of the vari-
ance in GDP.
III. An Econometric Model of
Telecommunication Investment and
Aggregate Output
In this section we employ a more structural
model, a production function framework, which
endogenizes telecommunications investment. To
endogenize the telecommunications sector into
the aggregate economy a micromodel of supply
and demand is speciﬁed and jointly estimated
with the macro production equation. In this way,
we endogenize telecommunications investment
and control for the causal effects discussed previ-
ously. In addition we allow for ﬁxed effects.
We relate national aggregate economic ac-
tivity to the stock of capital net of telecom-
munications capital (K), the stock of human
capital (HK), the stock of telecommunica-
tions infrastructure (TELECOM), and an
exogenous time trend (t). The stock of tele-
10 There is, however, less of a relationship between real
GDP per capita and the number of mainlines (0.42). Thus
the correlation between GDP and mainlines may partially be
an artifact of country size. Another explanation is the dif-
ferent degree of development across the OECD.
11 For more correlations on the same data set, as well
as for non-OECD countries, see Ro¨ller and Waverman
(1996).
TABLE 1—COMPOUNDED ANNUAL GROWTH RATES (CAGR) OF GDP, MAINLINES, AND TELECOMMUNICATION
CONTRIBUTION TO GDP FOR OECD COUNTRIES
GDP per Capita
(in US$)
CAGR
(percent)
1971–1990
Mainline per
100 inhabitants
CAGR
(percent)
1971–1990
Contribution of
telecommunication
CAGR 1971–1990
(percent)
1971
1990
1971
1990
a3 5 .154
a3 5 .045
Australia
9,513
12,575
1.48
22.08
47.09
4.07
2.16
0.73
Austria
10,230
16,991
2.71
14.19
41.76
5.85
2.81
0.99
Belgium
10,739
16,013
2.13
14.83
39.26
5.26
2.31
0.78
Canada
10,985
16,472
2.16
31.38
57.46
3.24
2.73
0.95
Denmark
14,708
20,496
1.76
26.50
56.63
4.08
3.31
1.19
Finland
10,860
20,135
3.30
20.49
53.54
5.18
3.67
1.35
France
11,359
17,399
2.27
9.02
49.78
9.41
6.32
2.70
Germany
12,850
19,799
2.30
15.76
47.41
5.97
3.42
1.24
Greece
3,750
4,896
1.41
11.90
38.94
6.44
2.95
1.04
Ireland
5,764
9,921
2.90
8.23
28.06
6.67
2.44
0.84
Italy
7,834
14,718
3.37
12.90
38.77
5.96
2.67
0.93
Japan
13,383
22,443
2.76
15.39
43.47
5.62
2.81
0.99
The Netherlands
11,685
16,080
1.69
18.24
46.42
5.04
2.71
0.94
New Zealand
9,409
10,490
0.57
29.37
43.60
2.10
0.91
0.28
Norway
12,767
19,962
2.38
19.75
50.28
5.04
3.11
1.11
Portugal
2,689
4,378
2.60
6.68
24.13
6.99
2.42
0.83
Spain
5,390
8,713
2.56
9.52
32.35
6.65
2.65
0.92
Sweden
13,676
20,001
2.02
45.90
68.33
2.12
7.38
3.32
Turkey
723
1,201
2.71
1.16
12.38
13.26
5.30
2.15
United Kingdom
8,490
12,625
2.11
16.51
44.25
5.32
2.70
0.94
United States
14,719
18,656
1.26
34.06
45.34
1.52
0.68
0.21
OECD average
11,297
16,321
1.96
20.38
42.58
3.96
1.80
0.59
Notes: GDP per capita is expressed in US$ at 1987 exchange rates and prices; CAGR stands for compounded annual growth
rate.
Sources: OECD Communications Outlook 1993, ITU Yearbook, 1993, and own calculations.
914
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

communications
infrastructure
is
needed
(rather than telecommunications investment)
because consumers demand telecommunica-
tions infrastructure, not telecommunications
investment per se. A measure of telecommu-
nications demand is required to model both
the demand for and the supply of telecommu-
nications, itself.
Our aggregate production function equation
is then as follows:
(1)
GDPit 5 f~Kit, HKit, TELECOMit, t!.
The coefﬁcient on TELECOM in equation (1)
estimates the one-way causal relationship
ﬂowing from the stock of telecommunications
infrastructure to economic output. To differ-
entiate between the two effects, that is,
the income elasticity of telecommunications
infrastructure
as
well
as
the
impact
of
TELECOM on GDP, we specify three other
equations, which endogenize the demand and
supply of telecommunications infrastructure
and its investments.
Demand for telecommunications infrastruc-
ture:
(2) TELECOMit 5 h~GDPit/POPit, TELPit!.
Supply of telecommunications investment:
(3)
TTIit 5 g~TELPit, Zit!.
Telecommunications infrastructure production
function:
(4)
TELECOMit 2 TELECOMi,t 2 1
5 ~TTIi,t, Rit!.
Equation (2) states that the demand for the
stock of telecommunications infrastructure is
a function of the price of telephone service
(TELP) and per capita GDP. Equation (3)
represents
the
supply
of
telecommunica-
tions infrastructure. Because the supply is in
the form of investment we specify in (3)
that telecommunications infrastructure invest-
ment (TTI) is a function of the telephone
price and a number of exogenous variables
affecting supply. Equation (4) provides for
the relationship between investment in tele-
communications
infrastructure
and
the
change in the stock of telecommunications
infrastructure.
It is important to note that equations (2), (3),
and (4) endogenize telecommunications infra-
structure, because these three equations involve
the demand for and supply of telecommunica-
tion infrastructure. The income elasticity of the
TABLE 2—VARIABLE DESCRIPTION AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
Variable
Description
Mean
Standard
development
Minimum
Maximum
Ka
Nonresidential capital stock net of telecommunications
capital in billion 1985 US$
413.91
680.40
10.98
3818.58
TLFa
Total labor force in millions
16.70
24.48
1.10
126.42
PENb
Penetration rate, main lines per capita
0.30
0.14
0.01
0.68
GDPa
GDP in billion 1985 US$
424.73
770.76
14.79
4524.97
TELPb
Price of telephone service, in 1985 US$, measured as
total real service revenue per mainline
536.66
158.42
244.62
1000.70
GAb
Geographic area in thousand km2
1516.39
3088.25
30.513
9970.61
GD
Government surplus (deﬁcit) in billion 1985 US$
215.48
31.37
2214.57
8.93
WLb
Waiting list for main lines per capita
0.01
0.02
0
0.11
TTIb
Investment in telecom infrastructure in billion 1985 US$
2.78
4.73
0.07
25.83
USCAN
Dummy variable for United States and Canada
0.03
0.18
0
1
T
Time trend
11
6.06
1
21
LOW
Dummy variable set to 1 when PEN # 20 percent
0.27
0.45
1
0
MEDIUM
Dummy variable set to 1 when 20 , PEN # 40 percent
0.48
0.50
1
0
HIGH
Dummy variable set to 1 when PEN . 40 percent
0.25
0.43
1
0
Sources: a Penn World Table 5.6 (Summers and Heston); b ITU Yearbook, 1993.
915
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

demand for telecommunications services is pro-
vided for in equation (2).
A. Empirical Implementation
The empirical implementation of the preced-
ing model corresponding to (1)–(4) involves
estimation of the following system of four equa-
tions.
(19)
log~GDPit! 5 a0i 1 a1log~Kit!
1 a2log~TLFit! 1 a3log~PENit!
1 a4t 1 «it
1;
(29)
log~PENit 1 WLit!
5 b0 1 b1log~GDPit/POPit!
1 b2log~TELPit! 1 «it
2;
(39)
log~TTIit! 5 c0 1 c1log~GAit!
1 c2GDit1 c3~1 2 USCAN! z WLit
1 c4~1 2 USCAN!log~TELPit!
1 c5USCAN z log~TELPit! 1 «it
3;
(49)
log~PENit/PENi,t 2 1!
5 d0 1 d1log~TTIit! 1 d2log~GAit! 1 «it
4.
where GDP is the real gross domestic product;
K is a measure of the real capital stock [from
Summers and Heston (1991)] net of telecom-
munication capital; TLF is the total labor force,
which is a proxy for the stock of human capi-
tal12; t is a linear time trend; WL is the waiting
list per capita; TELP is a measure of the tele-
phone service price; TTI is real investment in
telecommunications infrastructure; GD is the
real government deﬁcit; GA is the geographic
area of the country; and USCAN is a dummy
variable for the United States and Canada,
which is set equal to 1 for the years of 1983 and
beyond
(see
also
Table
2
for
variable
deﬁnitions).
The variable PEN is deﬁned as the penetra-
tion rate, given by the number of mainlines per
capita. We use the penetration rate as our mea-
sure to proxy the stock of telecommunications
infrastructure. In that PEN is bounded between
0 and 1 we have transformed it into a (positive)
unbounded variable by redeﬁning it as PEN 5
12 To the extent that changes in the stock of human
capital are not correlated with TLF, but correlated with
PEN, the estimated in (19) will be inconsistent.
FIGURE 1. TELECOMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Note: Selected OECD countries and average non-OECD for 1990.
916
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

PEN/(a 2 PEN) in (19)–(49). Given that the
maximum penetration rate is 0.68 (see Table
2) we have chosen a 5 0.7.
Note that (19) allows for the intercept to de-
pend on the country. In other words, we control
for country ﬁxed effects, which has been of
crucial importance for the estimated effect of
public
infrastructure
previously
discussed.
Equation (29) postulates that the effective de-
mand for mainlines per capita (the number of
mainlines per capita and the waiting list per
capita) is a function of the price of telephone
service and real per capita GDP. The waiting
list per capita is added to the penetration rate
because the number of mainlines in existence at
any point in time cannot be explained by the
telephone price. There would be excess demand
in some countries at that price. Unfortunately,
there is no measure of the price of telephone
service (e.g., local service, domestic trunk, or
international calling) available across this broad
spectrum of countries. Instead, we use tele-
phone revenue per mainline as a proxy.
Modeling the supply side of telecommunica-
tions across various OECD countries is not
straightforward, given that market structure and
the role of governments vary a great deal. One
possibility would be to specify a political econ-
omy model of infrastructure allocations.13 In
the present context this seems rather difﬁcult to
imagine, in that the political economy is poten-
tially very different across OECD countries. We
therefore adopt a more reduced-form approach
and assume in equation (39) that investment in
telecommunications infrastructure is generally
determined by economic, political, and geo-
graphic variables. We operationalize these de-
terminants
through
variables
such
as
the
geographic areas of a country, the government
deﬁcit, the waiting list per capita, and the price
of telephone service as representative explana-
tory variables. Furthermore, the United States
and Canada are “dummied out” in terms of their
supply-side response to prices and the waiting
line. Given the private market driven telecom-
munications suppliers in the United States and
Canada one would expect a different price elas-
ticity of supply.
The model is estimated by nonlinear general
methods of moments (GMM) for the OECD
countries. Table 3 reports the parameter esti-
mates for various speciﬁcations of model (19)–
(49).
IV. Results and Interpretation
The ﬁrst estimation of model (19)–(49) does
not control for ﬁxed country effects, that is the
intercept in (19) is held constant. The results are
reported in the ﬁrst column of Table 3. The
estimated parameters for the aggregate produc-
tion equation indicate that labor and capital are
positive and signiﬁcantly associated with out-
put. The elasticities for labor and capital are
roughly 0.6 and 0.4, respectively.
Similarly, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient on the
penetration rate in the aggregate production
equation is positive and signiﬁcant. This sug-
gests that an increase in the penetration rate
generates signiﬁcant aggregate economic out-
put. The magnitude of this effect can be calcu-
lated as follows. The point estimate of the
elasticity equals 0.15, which implies that a 1-
percent increase in the PEN variable increases
economic growth by, on average, 0.15 percent.
To get some better idea of the magnitude of this
estimate, it is instructive to work through an
example. Germany has had an increase in the
penetration rate from 15.76 percent in 1971 to
47.41 percent in 1990 (see Table 1), which
amounts to a 5.97 percent compounded annual
growth rate in the penetration rate over 20
years. Using the preceding estimate of 0.15 and
the deﬁnition of PEN, we obtain a compounded
annual growth effect of 3.4 percent;14 in other
words, this estimate implies that Germany’s in-
vestment into its telecom infrastructure boosted
13 For an empirical assessment of a political economy
model of road infrastructure allocation, see Oliver Cadot et
al. (1999).
14 The compounded annual growth effect can be calcu-
lated as
31
PEN90
0.7 2 PEN90 2
PEN70
0.7 2 PEN70
PEN70
0.7 2 PEN70
2
aˆ 3 1 14
1/20
where aˆ 3 is the estimate of 0.15.
917
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

aggregate economic output by some 3.4 percent
annually. Clearly this estimate is too high. Al-
though for other countries, as well as the OECD
average, results are somewhat lower (see Table
1), the results from this speciﬁcation attribute an
unbelievably large impact to telecommunica-
tions infrastructure. For example, given that the
OECD has grown at a compounded annual
growth rate of some 1.96 percent, whereas the
preceding estimates imply that some 1.80 per-
cent of growth is attributed to telecommunica-
tions (see Table 1 again), we obtain that 92
percent of OECD growth in GDP can be attrib-
uted to telecommunications (see Table 1).
These large effects are reminiscent of the
early estimates of the impact of public infra-
structure on economic growth discussed earlier.
Even though there are reasons to believe that
telecommunication
infrastructure
might
be
rather important for economic growth, an esti-
mate this large is excessive. One explanation
investigated below is that there is spurious cor-
relation, suggesting a ﬁxed-effects model. Note
that the coefﬁcient on the time trend is negative
and statistically signiﬁcant. This implies that
much of the positive growth effects can be
explained by telecommunication infrastructure
and both human and physical capital. This is
consistent with spurious correlation because it
appears that telecommunication picks up many
other growth-promoting factors.
Before turning to the other equations in Table
3 let us emphasize that the focus of the empir-
ical analysis is not on the estimation of demand
and supply relationships in the telecommunica-
tions industry. Nevertheless, we want to control
TABLE 3—TELECOMMUNICATION AND GROWTH: OECD COUNTRIES —NONLINEAR GMM ESTIMATES OF EQUATIONS (19)–(49)a
Variable
Model (1)
Model (2)
Model (3)
Estimate
T-ratio
Estimate
T-ratio
Estimate
T-ratio
Output equation
Intercept
28.367
223.17
—
—
—
—
K
0.411
11.49
0.556
19.88
0.627
19.01
TLF
0.627
16.44
0.614
7.91
0.529
6.52
PEN
0.154
7.84
0.045
4.87
0.034
3.55
MEDIUM
—
—
—
—
0.010
0.96
HIGH
—
—
—
—
0.040
2.40
t
20.009
25.10
20.005
22.37
20.007
22.80
Demand equation
Intercept
2.073
3.90
0.711
2.76
0.718
2.76
GDP/POP
2.382
39.63
2.081
60.42
2.076
59.22
TELP
21.131
214.55
21.130
236.71
21.127
236.05
Supply equation
Intercept
24.267
21.79
2.257
2.74
2.345
2.80
GA
0.396
14.19
0.322
32.49
0.320
31.49
GD
20.029
218.97
20.024
232.49
20.024
231.70
WL
3.624
1.09
26.727
26.07
26.739
26.06
(1-USCAN)*TELP
20.752
22.60
20.050
20.51
20.041
20.41
USCAN*TELP
20.535
21.79
0.150
1.42
0.163
1.53
Production equation
Intercept
0.133
7.85
0.141
17.76
0.141
17.60
TTI
0.003
2.29
0.002
1.80
0.002
1.58
GA
20.005
23.22
20.005
27.31
20.005
27.11
a Model (1) refers to the standard (no ﬁxed-effects) model; model (2) reports the ﬁxed-effects estimates; and model (3)
refers to the dummy variable model of the effects on growth. The mean squared error (MSE) of each equation is as follows:
Output
Demand
Supply
Production
Model (1)
0.025
0.171
0.906
0.002
Model (2)
0.003
0.154
0.794
0.002
Model (3)
0.003
0.154
0.794
0.002
Number of observations: 396.
918
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

for them as much as possible. Moreover, it is
comforting that most of the remaining parame-
ters are fairly robust across the different speci-
ﬁcations below. For the demand equation, the
effective demand is signiﬁcantly inversely re-
lated to telephone price. The elasticity of de-
mand is estimated at 21.13 and is signiﬁcantly
larger than 1, implying an elastic demand. Re-
garding the income effect, we ﬁnd the demand
for telecommunications infrastructure is posi-
tively related to real GDP, with the income
elasticity being rather large and very signiﬁcant.
This ﬁnding is important for our purposes, be-
cause we argued previously that there is two-
way causality between telecom infrastructure
and growth because there are likely to be in-
come effects.
For the supply function we ﬁnd that the geo-
graphic area is very signiﬁcant in explaining
telecommunications investments (i.e., larger
countries do invest more in telecommunica-
tions). The level of government deﬁcit is also
signiﬁcantly related to telecommunications in-
vestment across the OECD. One might have felt
that telecommunications infrastructure invest-
ment would be positively affected by a govern-
ment
surplus
in
the
OECD
because
the
existence of a surplus would loosen the con-
straints on investment by the PTT. However, we
ﬁnd a negative relationship, indicating that PTT
investment is associated with a deﬁcit. One pos-
sible explanation for this is that telecommuni-
cations infrastructure investment is associated
with other spending programs that jointly cause
larger government deﬁcits, that is, the existence
of a deﬁcit is not an impediment to investment
in telecommunications infrastructure. The wait-
ing list for mainlines per capita is positively
related to the supply of telecommunications in-
frastructure. This would suggest that those
countries with a large waiting list invest less.
However, the relationship is not statistically sig-
niﬁcant, which indicates that supply does not
respond to excess demand, possibly because of
technical constraints. Finally, the price of tele-
communications services is inversely related to
supply. This is surprising as it suggests that
supply is larger when prices are lower. This
might be the result of market structure being
rather different across countries. As we see be-
low, this result will not survive, once we control
for country-speciﬁc effects.
The last equation reported in Table 3 is the
production function relating investment to the
penetration rate. As expected, its relationship
is positive and signiﬁcant. The elasticity is
about 0.003, indicating that a one-time 10-
percent increase in investment would result in
a 0.3-percent increase in the penetration rate.
Again, we ﬁnd that the geographic area is a
signiﬁcant determinant of the penetration
rate: the larger the country, the more invest-
ment is needed to accomplish a given tele-
communications infrastructure.
As discussed previously in the context of
public infrastructure, much of the impact on
economic growth disappears once one controls
for ﬁxed effects. To test whether this is so for
telecommunications infrastructure we next re-
estimate our model, allowing for a country-
speciﬁc intercept in equation (19). The results
are reported in column (2) of Table 3.
As can be seen, most of the parameter esti-
mates and the statistical signiﬁcance change
only slightly. We therefore do not discuss all the
estimates again. However, the impact of the
penetration rate does change substantially by
incorporating country-speciﬁc factors: the point
estimate of the elasticity is now reduced to
0.045, implying growth effects that are much
more reasonable than before. For example, tak-
ing the case of Germany again, we now estimate
the impact of telecommunications infrastructure
on aggregate economic growth to be at a com-
pounded annual effect of 1.2 percent. Table
1 computes the annual compounded impact of
telecommunications infrastructure for various
OECD countries. It can be seen that the result-
ing impact on growth is much lower for the
ﬁxed-effects model (a3 5 0.045). For the
OECD average the impact of telecommunica-
tions is reduced to some 0.59 percent of GNP
annually. Given that the OECD has grown at a
compounded annual growth rate of some 1.96
percent, our ﬁxed-effect estimates imply that
about one third of growth can be attributed to
telecommunications.
Overall, it can be said that the ﬁxed-effects
estimates are more reasonable, even though
they are still rather large. In sum, these results
are indeed very similar to the earlier literature
on the returns of public infrastructure capital. It
appears that less impact is found, once simulta-
neities and ﬁxed effects are controlled for.
919
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

As we have previously noted, there is one
important characteristic in telecommunications:
network externalities. A priori there is no reason
to believe that the growth impact from tele-
communications infrastructure should not be
substantially larger than other types of infra-
structure that are not subject to network exter-
nalities. An implication of network externalities
is that the impact of telecommunications infra-
structure on growth might not be linear, in that
the growth impact might be larger whenever a
signiﬁcant network size is achieved. This would
imply that positive growth effects might be sub-
ject to having achieved a critical mass in a
given country’s communications infrastructure.
It is worth emphasizing that our speciﬁcation
of demand (29) does not explicitly test for the
existence of network externalities. The purpose
of our study is to analyze the effect of telecom-
munication infrastructure on output, and to test
whether there is a nonlinearity in the output
equation. One possible explanation of such non-
linearities is the existence of network external-
ities because telecom is a network commodity
par excellence. However, we cannot be explicit
about the link between network externalities
and output because we do not directly measure
network externalities. Consequently, our results
concerning
network
externalities
are
only
suggestive.
To test whether such nonlinearities in tele-
communications do exist we respecify (19) as
(10)
log~GDPit! 5 a0i 1 a1log~Kit!
1 a2log~TLFit! 1 ~a3 1 a4MEDIUMit
1 a5HIGH) z PENit 1 a6t 1 «it
1
where the dummy variables MEDIUM and
HIGH correspond to a medium and high pene-
tration rate as deﬁned in Table 2. Roughly about
half of our sample falls into the medium range
(a penetration rate of telephones per population
between 20 and 40 percent), whereas about 25
percent of the sample is classiﬁed as high pen-
etration rate (i.e., a penetration rate of over 40
percent, which amounts to at least a phone in
every household). The remaining 25 percent is
classiﬁed into a low penetration rate (see Table
2 for a precise deﬁnition). Note that (10) again
allows for ﬁxed country effects. What we are
interested in is the signiﬁcance and relative
magnitudes of (a3, a4a5). For example, when-
ever a3 is positive and signiﬁcant, but a4 and a5
are negative, then we have support for a “di-
minishing returns” hypothesis. If, however, the
signs are reversed (i.e., a4 . 0 and a5 . 0),
then we have evidence in support of a “critical
mass” theory, in that the impact might be rela-
tively insigniﬁcant for low penetration rates.
The estimation results of the system (10),
(29)–(49) are given in column (3) of Table 3. As
expected, most of the parameter estimates
change only slightly compared to those of the
previous model. Note that the price of telephone
service now has the expected sign in the supply
equation, yet it is not statistically signiﬁcant.
Most important, the parameter estimate corre-
sponding to the growth effects of telecommuni-
cation infrastructure for low penetration rates is
0.034, which is below the average effect dis-
cussed previously. However, it is statistically
signiﬁcant (t-statistic of 3.55), which implies
that important growth effects from telecommu-
nication infrastructure exist, even for countries
with a relatively low penetration rate.
Interestingly, the growth effects achieved at
relatively low levels of telecom infrastructure
are not any larger for medium levels of infra-
structure. The parameter estimate in Table 3 for
medium penetration rates is small and not sig-
niﬁcant (t-statistic of 0.96), indicating that for a
large range there are no additional growth gains.
However, for high levels of telecommunications
infrastructure the impact on aggregate eco-
nomic growth is substantially larger. In fact, the
impact is twice as large for the high end as it is
for the low and medium ends. We therefore ﬁnd
a constant effect up to a penetration rate of 40
percent, with stronger growth effects for levels
of infrastructure of above 40 percent. Because a
40-percent penetration rate approaches univer-
sal service (with roughly 2–2.5 people per
household) we ﬁnd that growth effects are
signiﬁcantly higher for countries whose tele-
communication infrastructure has approached
universal service.15
15 Another interesting issue might be to investigate the
extent to which the simultaneity effects the results, in par-
ticular our estimate of the telecom impact on output. We
have therefore reestimated our model for the production
function alone for the three alternative speciﬁcations in
920
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

These results suggest that there might be
increasing returns to telecommunication in-
vestments, which is consistent with the pres-
ence of network externalities. In particular,
there might be a critical mass phenomenon in
infrastructure investments. In the context of
our analysis this critical mass would corre-
spond to a 40 percent penetration rate, which
includes most of the OECD countries today.
However, taking a sample of non-OECD
countries for which we were able to obtain
data,16 we ﬁnd that those countries are on
average far below the critical level of 40
percent. In fact, the non-OECD countries
have a mean penetration rate of only 4 per-
cent. In this context, our results would imply
that marginal improvements in the telecom-
munication infrastructure in non-OECD coun-
tries might not generate the largest possible
aggregate growth effects. Therefore, non-
OECD
countries
might
only
realize
the
growth effects through telecommunication in-
vestments like their OECD counterparts, if a
signiﬁcant improvement in the telecommuni-
cations infrastructure is achieved.
Another implication of the increasing returns
to telecommunication infrastructure is that there
may be a tendency for divergence in economic
performance. Those countries that are above the
critical mass would have a higher growth rate,
whereas others would grow much slower. Turn-
ing the argument around would imply that a
convergence in telecommunication infrastruc-
ture would offset divergence in economic per-
formance.
VI. Conclusion
In this paper we have attempted to investi-
gate the relationship between telecommunica-
tions infrastructure investments and economic
performance. We estimate a model, which
endogenizes telecommunications investment
by specifying a micromodel of supply and
demand for telecommunications investments.
To pick up economywide effects, the micro-
model is then jointly estimated with the
macro production equation. After accounting
for simultaneity and country-speciﬁc ﬁxed ef-
fects, we ﬁnd a causal relationship between
telecommunications infrastructure and aggre-
gate output.
One important characteristic of IT technolo-
gies, which is not present in other types of
infrastructures, is network externalities. An im-
plication of network externalities is that the
impact of telecommunications infrastructure on
growth might not be linear. Allowing for three
levels of telecommunication infrastructure we
ﬁnd that a critical mass exists, leading to in-
creasing returns on growth at levels approach-
ing
universal
service.
This
suggests
that
increases in telecommunications infrastructure
could create higher growth effects in OECD
countries than in the less-developed non-OECD
countries.
An important question not addressed in this
paper, and one that would naturally build on
the existence of growth effects, is: What mar-
ket structure might be suited best to appropri-
ate these returns? This includes the speciﬁc
role of government, if any, in providing an
efﬁcient infrastructure to foster growth and
competitiveness. A related issue of consider-
able interest is the relationship between tele-
communications
infrastructure
investments
and job creation.
REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe and Howitt, Peter. Endogenous
growth theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1998.
Aschauer, David Alan. “Is Public Expenditure
Productive?” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics, March 1989, 23(2), pp. 177–200.
Balmaseda, Manuel. “Simultaneity Bias and the
Rate of Return on Public Capital.” Centro de
Table 3. The results are as follows. For the simpler speci-
ﬁcation (Models 1 and 2), the point estimates are not much
effected. However, for Model 3 results are changed more
substantially. For example, the high penetration impact is
increased from 0.074 to 0.091 by ignoring the simultaneity,
which translates into nontrivial growth effects. In sum, it
appears that the impact of simultaneity is not always equally
signiﬁcant, depending on the precise speciﬁcation. In fact,
given that the supply equation is in ﬂows, whereas the
production function is in stocks, there is no a priori reason
to believe that the simultaneity is enormous. Nevertheless,
for the most important speciﬁcation for our purposes (Mod-
el 3) it turns out that correcting for simultaneity is crucial.
16 See Ro¨ller and Waverman (1996) for details. The list
of non-OECD countries used in this study includes: Algeria,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Egypt, India, Indone-
sia, Korea, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, and
Tunisia.
921
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Estudios Monetarious y Financieros working
paper, 1996.
Barro, Robert J. and Sala-i-Martin, Xavier.
“Convergence.” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, April 1992, 100(2), pp. 223–51.
Cadot,
Olivier;
Ro¨ller,
Lars-Hendrik
and
Stephan,
Andreas. “A Political Economy
Model of Infrastructure Allocation: An Em-
pirical Assessment.” Centre for Economic
Policy Research (London) Discussion Paper
No. 2336, December 1999.
De Long, J. Bradford and Summers, Lawrence H.
“Equipment
Investments
and
Economic
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May 1991, 106(2), pp. 445–502.
. “How Strongly Do Developing Coun-
tries Beneﬁt from Equipment Investment?”
Journal of Monetary Economics, December
1993, 32(3), pp. 395–415.
Fernald, John G. “Roads to Prosperity? Assess-
ing the Link Between Public Capital and Pro-
ductivity.” American Economic Review, June
1999, 89(3), pp. 619–38.
Garcia-Mila, T. and McGuire, T. J. “The Contri-
bution of Publicly Provided Inputs to States’
Economies.” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, June 1992, 22(2), pp. 229–41.
Grammlich, Edward M. “Infrastructure Investment:
A Review Essay.” Journal of Economic Litera-
ture, September 1994, 32(2), pp. 1176–96.
Greenstein, Shane and Spiller, Pablo T. “Estimat-
ing the Welfare Effects of Digital Infrastruc-
ture.”
National
Bureau
of
Economic
Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper
No. 5770, September 1996.
Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan. “En-
dogenous
Innovation
in
the
Theory
of
Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Winter 1994, 8(1), pp. 23–44.
Hardy, Andrew. “The Role of the Telephone in
Economic Development.” Telecommunica-
tions Policy, 1980, 4(4), pp. 278–86.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas. “State-Speciﬁc Estimates
of State and Local Government Capital.” Re-
gional Science and Urban Economics, April
1993, 23(2), pp. 185–209.
. “Public-Sector Capital and the Produc-
tivity Puzzle.” Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics, February 1994, 76(1), pp. 12–21.
Hulten, Charles R. “Optimal Growth with Infra-
structure Capital: Implications for Empirical
Modelling.” Working paper, University of
Maryland, 1994.
Hulten, Charles R. and Schwab, Robert M. “Re-
gional Productivity Growth in U.S. Manufac-
turing,
1951–1978.”
American
Economic
Review, March 1984, 74(1), pp. 152–62.
. “Is There Too Little Public Capital?
Infrastructure and Economic Growth.” Paper
presented at the American Enterprise Insti-
tute Conference, February 1991.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
World Telecommunication Development Re-
port.
Geneva,
Switzerland:
International
Telecommunication Union, 1993.
Kelejian, Harry H. and Robinson, Dennis P. “In-
frastructure Productivity Estimations and Its
Underlying Economic Speciﬁcations: A Sen-
sitivity Analysis.” Papers in Regional Sci-
ence, June 1997, 76(1), pp. 115–32.
Leff, Nathaniel H. “Externalities, Information
Costs, and Social Beneﬁt-Cost Analysis for
Economic Development: An Example from
Telecommunications.” Economic Develop-
ment and Cultural Change, January 1984,
32(2), pp. 255–76.
Lichtenberg, Frank. “The Output Contributions
of Computer Equipment and Personnel: A
Firm-Level Analysis.” Economics of Innova-
tion and New Technology, 1995, 3(3–4), pp.
201–17.
Mankiw, N. Gregory; Romer, David and Weil,
David N. “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May 1992, 107(2), pp. 407–37.
Munnell, Alicia H. “Policy Watch: Infrastructure
Investment and Economic Growth.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Fall 1992, 6(4),
pp. 189–98.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Mamuneas, Theofanis P.
“Contribution of Highway Capital to Industry
and National Productivity Growth.” [Unpub-
lished] working paper, March 1996.
Norton, Seth W. “Transaction Costs, Telecom-
munications, and the Microeconomics of
Macroeconomic Growth.” Economic Devel-
opment and Cultural Change, October 1992,
41(1), pp. 175–96.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment (OECO). Communications Out-
look.
Paris:
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation and Development, 1993.
Pereira, Alfredo M. and de Frutos, Rafael Flores.
“Public Capital Accumulation and Private
922
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2001

Sector Performance in the U.S.” [Unpub-
lished] working paper, August 1995.
Quah, Danny. “Empirical Cross-Section Dy-
namics in Economic Growth.” European
Economic Review, April 1993a, 37(2–3), pp.
426–34.
. “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the
Convergence
Hypothesis.”
Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, December 1993b,
95(4), pp. 427–43.
Ro¨ller, Lars-Hendrik and Waverman, Leonard
“The Impact of Telecommunications Infra-
structure on Economic Development,” in
Peter Howitt, ed., The implications of
knowledge-based
growth
for
micro-
economic policies. Calgary: University of
Calgary Press, 1996, pp. 363–87.
Romer, Paul M. “Increasing Returns and Long-
Run Growth.” Journal of Political Economy,
1986, 94(5), pp. 1024–37.
Solow, Robert M. “A Contribution to the Theory
of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 1956, 70(1), pp. 65–94.
Summers, Robert and Heston, Alan. “The Penn
World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International
Comparisons,
1950–1988.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1991,
106(2), pp. 327–68.
923
VOL. 91 NO. 4
RO¨ LLER AND WAVERMAN: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT


============================================================
FILE: dauvin2014estimating.pdf
============================================================
Estimating broadband diffusion in the EU using NUTS 1
regional data
Magali Dauvin a,n, Lukasz Grzybowski b,c
a Universite Paris X Nanterre, 200 Avenue de la Republique, 92000 Nanterre, France
b Telecom ParisTech, Department of Economics and Social Sciences, 46 rue Barrault, 75013 Paris, France
c School of Economics, Faculty of Commerce, University of Cape Town, Private Bag, Rondebosch 7701, Cape Town, South Africa
a r t i c l e i n f o
Available online 27 September 2013
Keywords:
Broadband diffusion
Inter-platform competition
Intra-platform competition
LLU prices
a b s t r a c t
In this paper we use panel data on NUTS 1 regional data for 27 EU countries in the years
2006–2010 to analyze determinants of broadband diffusion. We estimate both linear
demand specification and the logistic diffusion function. We find that, after controlling for
regional differences due to socioeconomic factors, inter-platform competition approxi-
mated by an inter-platform Herfindahl index has a significant positive impact on broad-
band diffusion. Broadband deployment is lower in countries in which DSL has a greater
share in Internet access and it is higher in countries in which cable modem has a greater
share in Internet access. Moreover, we find that competition between DSL providers has a
significant and positive impact on broadband penetration. First, higher prices for a fully
unbundled local loop connection, which represent the cost of providing copper-based
Internet services, have a significant and negative impact on broadband penetration.
Second, a greater incumbent share in DSL connections has a significant and negative
impact on broadband penetration.
& 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In the last decade the European Commission has been pursuing the objective of universal broadband access to the
Internet according to which all European households should have access to basic broadband by 2013. Moreover, as set out in
the Digital Agenda for Europe, “by 2020, all Europeans should have access to Internet of above 30 Megabits per second
(Mb/s) and 50% or more of European households have subscriptions above 100Mb/s.”1 The Commission recognizes that it is
necessary to develop a comprehensive policy towards broadband deployment based on a mix of technologies and to
monitor the progress. The objective of this paper is to provide empirical evidence on the determinants of broadband
penetration which should help to guide policies towards achieving these objectives.
In 2011, about 67% of households in the European Union (EU) had fixed broadband access but there is a large variation in
adoption rates across the EU countries and across regions within particular countries. The highest broadband penetration
could be observed in regions in Sweden and Netherlands with about 85% of households having access to broadband and the
lowest in regions in Romania and Bulgaria with about 20% of households having broadband access. There are also
differences in the type of technologies which are adopted across countries. Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) is still the most
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
URL: www.elsevier.com/locate/telpol
Telecommunications Policy
0308-5961/$ - see front matter & 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2013.05.006
n Corresponding author at: Telecom ParisTech, Department of Economics and Social Sciences, 46 rue Barrault, 75013 Paris, France.
E-mail addresses: magali.dauvin@u-paris10.fr (M. Dauvin), lukasz.grzybowski@telecom-paristech.fr (L. Grzybowski).
1 Digital Agenda for Europe is a flagship initiative of the Europe 2020 strategy for a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy. See “A Digital Agenda for
Europe – COM(2010) 245”.
Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104

commonly used technology in the EU with about 71% of fixed broadband connections as of 2011, but Internet access based
on cable modem and fibre to the home (FTTH) has been steadily growing. Also, mobile broadband via modem has been
increasingly popular with penetration rate reaching about 8% of the European households as of 2011.2
Even though there is a common agenda towards broadband deployment set out by the Commission for all the EU
countries, there are significant differences in how broadband adoption evolves due to historical reasons, socioeconomic
factors and country-specific approaches towards implementation of policies set out by the Commission. In particular, there
are significant differences with respect to the intensity of intra- and inter-platform competition between Western European
(WE) and Central and Eastern European countries, where intra-platform competition refers to competition within the DSL
platform, and inter-platform competition refers to competition between DSL and other technologies, such as cable modem,
FTTH, mobile broadband (see Bouckaert, van Dijk, & Verboven, 2010). In general, there is more inter-platform competition in
the new EU countries and more intra-platform competition in the old EU countries. Fig. 1 illustrates shares of broadband
technologies in the EU countries as of 2011 and Fig. 2 illustrates incumbent share in DSL connections as of 2010. Similarly,
there are differences in the implementation of regulations which may have an impact on broadband diffusion, such as
timing and speed of local loop unbundling (LLU) and regulation of prices for fully unbundled local loop connections or
shared access.3
There is a growing body of studies which analyze determinants of broadband penetration focusing on variables such as
intra- and inter-platform competition, LLU price regulation, etc. However, these studies rely mainly on country-level panel
data for OECD countries and as such cannot fully capture the degree of heterogeneity which is present on the regional level
within the country. We improve upon this by using newly available regional data for the EU countries which is termed the NUTS
1 level data. NUTS is a geocode standard for referencing the administrative divisions of the EU countries for statistical purposes.
There are three NUTS levels but due to smaller size not every country has all division levels. For instance, in the case of
Luxembourg all three NUTS divisions represent the whole country. We use data at the NUTS 1 level, which refers to basic
regions with population ranging between 3 and 7 million inhabitants.4 There are 97 NUTS 1 regions in 27 EU countries out
of which 96 are used in our analysis. Using NUTS 1 level data, after controlling for a number of region-specific
socioeconomic variables, we should be able to disentangle the effects of country-level policies on broadband penetration
more accurately than in country-level studies.
We estimate both linear demand specification and the logistic diffusion function for NUTS 1 level data in the years 2006–
2010. We find that, after controlling for regional differences due to socioeconomic factors, inter-platform competition
approximated by inter-platform Herfindahl index has a significant positive impact on broadband diffusion. Broadband
deployment is lower in countries in which DSL has a greater share in Internet access and it is higher in countries in which
cable modem has a greater share in Internet access. Moreover, we find that competition between DSL providers also has a
significant impact on broadband penetration. First, higher prices for a fully unbundled local loop connection, which
represent the cost of providing copper-based Internet services, have a significant and negative impact on broadband
penetration. Second, a greater incumbent share in DSL connections has a significant and negative impact on broadband
penetration.
Fig. 1. Market shares of broadband technologies in 2011.
“Eurobarometer: E-Communications Household Surveys”, fieldwork in February–March 2011.
2 Source: “Eurobarometer: E-Communications Household Surveys”, fieldwork in February–March 2011.
3 Local loop unbundling is the regulatory process of allowing multiple telecommunications operators to use connections from the telephone exchange
to the customer's premises.
4 Source: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/nuts_nomenclature/introduction.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
97

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes previous research on broadband diffusion.
Section 3 discusses the empirical framework. Section 4 introduces the data. Section 5 presents estimation results and finally,
Section 6 concludes.
2. Literature review
There is a growing body of literature on broadband diffusion with its main focus on the effects of competition and
regulation on broadband penetration. In general, competition is found to have a significant and positive impact on
broadband diffusion but with some differences with respect to the importance of inter- and intra-platform competition.
Apart from competition and regulatory variables, some socioeconomic variables matter for broadband diffusion, such as
GDP per capita, computer penetration, population density and education.
In linear regression for a panel data of 14 European countries between 2000 and 2004, Distaso, Lupi, and Manenti (2006)
find that inter-platform competition has a positive impact on broadband diffusion while competition in the market for DSL
services does not play a significant role. In another paper, using the logistic diffusion model for a panel data for U.S. Federal
States between 1999 and 2004, Denni and Gruber (2007) find that both intra- and inter-platform competition are significant
and positive but intra-platform competition has a positive impact only at the early stage of broadband diffusion. Lee and
Brown (2008) estimate a logistic diffusion function using data for 30 OECD countries in the years 1999–2006 and find that
competition between platforms has a positive impact on broadband diffusion at the early stage but the impact decreases
when broadband market becomes mature. They also find that LLU regulation is statistically significant and increases
broadband penetration.
Bouckaert et al. (2010) distinguish three types of competition between broadband Internet access providers that result
from regulatory policies: (i) inter-platform competition which is not dependent on access regulation; (ii) facilities-based
intra-platform competition which refers to the process where access seekers lease bare unbundled local loops and have to
invest in equipment at some point in time; (iii) service-based intra-platform competition which offers two ways of access
for the new entrants: bitstream or resale services offered by the incumbent. Their main research question is whether
mandatory access facilitates broadband diffusion. They use a linear random effects regression model based on a panel of 20
OECD countries in the years 2003–2008 and find that inter-platform competition has a positive impact on broadband
diffusion whereas the intra-platform competition variables have small positive impact or are insignificant.
Lee, Lee, and Marcu (2011) estimate separate logistic diffusion models for fixed and mobile broadband. Among other
results, they find that local loop unbundling has a significant and positive impact on fixed broadband diffusion, while
multiple standard policy has a significant and positive influence on mobile broadband diffusion. However, intra-platform
competition is not significant in the fixed broadband regression. Finally, Gruber and Koutroumpis (2011) study the adoption
of broadband services using quarterly panel data for 167 countries between 2000 and 2010. Similar to Lee et al. (2011), they
do not find that inter-platform competition accelerates broadband adoption. Their results suggest that competition on the
incumbent's DSL platform has a positive impact on broadband diffusion. They also find that unbundling of selected networks
elements has a positive impact on the speed of diffusion. Finding no effect of inter-platform competition on broadband
penetration the studies by Gruber and Koutroumpis (2011) and Lee et al. (2011) differ from the papers mentioned above,
which reported positive effect of competition between platforms.
Fig. 2. Incumbent share in DSL connections in 2010.
“15th Progress Reports on the Single European Electronic Communications Market”, August 2010.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
98

3. The data
Table 1 presents the list of variables used in the estimation and data sources. This paper differs from the previous studies
because we use panel data for NUTS 1 regions in the EU in the years 2006–2010. In the regressions we use 385 observations
for 96 out of 97 NUTS 1 regions. As reported in Table 2 there are many observations missing for broadband penetration. The
data for other variables is relatively complete.
Broadband penetration: The dependant variable is broadband penetration measured as the number of broadband
subscriptions per 100 households (bb-pen), which is published at NUTS 1 level by Eurostat.5 We define broadband
penetration at the household level rather than population level because it is still rather rare that a household has more than
one broadband connection.
The following set of explanatory variables is used in the regression analysis:
Inter-platform Herfindahl index: To calculate the Herfindahl index for the broadband market (hhi-inter) we use the
data from the “Eurobarometer: E-Communications Household Surveys” carried out by TNS Opinion & Social Network
on behalf of the European Commission. The purpose of these surveys is to follow trends in electronic communications
markets and to assess how EU households and citizens derive benefit from an increasingly competitive and innovative
digital environment.6 In this paper we use aggregate response data which is publicly available in the reports
published on the website of the European Commission. The question asked to households which was the basis for
the calculation of HHI index was “How does your household access the Internet from home?”. Multiple answers
were allowed with the following options: (i) ADSL; (ii) dial-up standard line; (iii) cable TV network; (iv) dial-up ISDN;
(v) mobile phone network; and (vi) satellite network.7 In the calculation of the Herfindahl index we considered
only four options: DSL, cable modem, mobile broadband and other. Inter-platform competition is expected to have
a positive impact on broadband adoption with the effect coming through lower prices and greater variety,
quality and availability of broadband services. This variable is constructed on country-level due to lack of data on
NUTS 1 level.
Prices for LLU: The prices for fully unbundled local loop connection (llu-full) and shared access connection (llu-shared)
represent the cost of entry and provision of broadband services on the incumbent's network and therefore approximate
intra-platform competition. The LLU prices are extracted from the “Progress Reports on the Single European Electronic
Communications Market” which are published on the website of the European Commission on annual basis. These prices
are reported on country-level.
Incumbent share in DSL connections: Another variable which approximates intra-platform competition is the incumbent's
share in DSL connections (dsl-share) which is also extracted from the EC reports. A greater incumbent share in DSL
connection can be expected to negatively influence broadband penetration because it may have a negative effect on
broadband prices, product variety, quality and availability. This variable is reported on country-level.
In this analysis we cannot take into account the effect of any other regulatory variables such as the implementation of
LLU because our data starts in 2006 when LLU was already mandated in almost all the EU countries. There is no sufficient
variation to measure the effect of LLU implementation on broadband penetration other than via the effect of LLU prices.
Socioeconomic variables: The following socioeconomic variables are used in the regression analysis.
 Income (gdp) was found to be significant and positive in the previous studies on broadband penetration. It is
approximated by GDP per capita (in 1000 Euros). This variable is used on NUTS 1 level and is available for the years
2006–2010 from Eurostat.
 Number of households (num-house) is available on NUTS 1 level and is taken from Eurostat regional market statistics
database. The population of households consists of all households having at least one member of the age between 16 and
74 years.
 Computer penetration (pc-pen) measures the share of households having access to a computer. It is extracted from the
Eurobarometer reports on country-level due to lack of information on NUTS 1 level.
 Population density (density) is available on NUTS 1 level from Eurostat.
 The education variable (students) measures the number of students and pupils who are in the ordinary school
and university system relative to the total population size in the region. This data is available on NUTS 1 level from
Eurostat.
5 The data on broadband penetration is not available for the region of Bremen in Germany (DE5) at all. It is also not available for eight regions in the UK
in 2010 for which we used an average for years 2009 and 2011. The other data is missing either at the beginning or at the end of the period and could not be
interpolated.
6 So far there were five Special Eurobarometer surveys focusing on telecommunications conducted in December 2005–January 2006; November–
December 2006; November 2007–January 2008; November–December 2009 and February–March 2011. In the most recent survey, the interviews were
conducted among 26,836 EU citizens in 27 Member States of the European Union. A technical note on the way in which the interviews were conducted by
the institutes within the TNS Opinion & Social Network can be found in the annexes of the reports.
7 The range of possible answers depends on the year of the survey. In the first survey conducted for the year 2006, only two answers were possible,
either DSL or cable modem which were the main technologies at this time.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
99

4. The empirical model
We analyze the determinants of broadband adoption using two different model specifications. First, we estimate a simple
linear demand equation in which broadband penetration is regressed on prices for LLU connection, inter-platform HHI
index, incumbent share in DSL connections and socioeconomic variables. Alternatively, we also estimate the same model in
log–log specification. Next, we estimate the logistic diffusion function using the same set of explanatory variables.
4.1. Linear demand function
First, we estimate a simple linear reduced form regression in which broadband penetration, yit, is regressed on demand
factors denoted by Dit and supply factors which can be divided into cost factors denoted by Cit and markup determinants
denoted by Mit, where i is country and t is time period subscript
yit ¼ Ditα þ Citβ þ Mitγ þ ϵit
ð1Þ
Demand factors include socioeconomic variables such as GDP per capita, share of students and pupils in the population,
computer penetration. Cost factors include LLU prices and region-specific characteristics: population density and number of
households which may represent economies of scale. Markup determinants include inter-platform HHI and incumbent
share in DSL connections. The stochastic error term, ϵit, is assumed to be iid normally distributed. We also estimate log–log
specification in which the penetration log is regressed on the same set of variables in logarithms.
4.2. Logistic diffusion
It is commonly observed that technologies follow an S-shaped diffusion pattern. After a slow take-up in the early
diffusion stage, at some point of time technology becomes mainstream with exponential growth rates. Once it becomes
widespread and approaches saturation level, the growth rate slows down again. Many empirical studies analyze
determinants of diffusion of telecommunications services using the logistic diffusion model, see for instance Gruber and
Verboven (2001), Denni and Gruber (2007), Lee and Brown (2008). The broadband diffusion pattern may be also
approximated by an S-shaped function.
The logistic diffusion model can be specified as follows. Let yit denote the number of consumers who have adopted
broadband technology in country i at time t and let yn
i denote the number of potential adopters in country i, i.e., the
Table 1
Variables and data sources.
Description
Variable
Data source
Data level
Broadband penetration (% of households)
bb-pen
Eurostat (2006–2010), OECD
NUTS 1
HHI for broadband platforms
hhi-inter
EC Eurobarometer
Country
Prices per fully unbundled loop—connection (Euros)
llu-full
EC reports (2006–2010)
Country
Incumbent share in DSL connections
dsl-share
EC reports (2006–2010)
Country
GDP per capita (current prices)
gdp
Eurostat (2006–2010)
NUTS 1
Population density (population per km2)
density
Eurostat (2006–2010)
NUTS 1
Number of households (in million)
num-house
Eurostat (2006–2010)
NUTS 1
Students and pupils as % of population
students
Eurostat (2006–2010)
NUTS 1
Computer penetration as (% of households)
pc-pen
EC Eurobarometer
Country
Years passed since introduction of broadband
years-intro
Czernich et al. (2011) & NRAs
Country
Table 2
Summary statistics.
Variable
N
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Max
bb
394
0.51
0.18
0.08
0.85
hhi
485
0.52
0.17
0.27
1.00
cable
485
0.18
0.15
0.00
0.62
dsl
485
0.58
0.23
0.05
1.00
dsl-share
485
0.64
0.19
0.31
1.00
llu-full
485
55.24
33.24
12.60
186.20
gdp
485
24.12
12.33
2.70
78.60
density
485
0.40
0.92
0.01
6.90
num-house
475
2.14
1.55
0.01
8.54
students
470
0.22
0.03
0.15
0.36
computer
485
0.58
0.14
0.13
0.95
years-intro
485
7.78
1.97
2.00
12.00
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
100

maximum broadband penetration level. The diffusion curve is given by
yit ¼
yn
i
1 þ expð−ait−bittÞ
ð2Þ
where ait is called the location or timing parameter which shifts the diffusion curve backward or forward depending on its
sign but without changing the S-shape. The speed parameter bit measures the speed of diffusion and represents the growth
rate in the number of adopters relative to the number of agents who have not adopted the technology yet. After
transformation we get the following linear equation to be estimated
log
yn
i −yit
yit


¼ −ait−bitt þ ϵit
ð3Þ
Again the error term ϵit is assumed to be iid normally distributed.
We need to specify our three parameters: yn
i , ait, and bit. The maximum number of adopters yn
i can be defined in different
ways. For instance, Czernich, Falck, Kretschmer, and Woessmann (2011) assume that the maximum reach of broadband is
determined by the extension of the voice-telephony and cable-TV networks that existed before broadband. On the other
hand, Gruber and Verboven (2001) assume that the number of potential adopters of mobile telephony varies proportionally
to total population. We assume that the number of potential adopters is equivalent to the number of households since there
will be in general at most one broadband connection per household.
As commonly specified in the previous studies, the speed of diffusion parameter bit can be influenced by a greater degree
of competition approximated in our model by inter-platform HHI index and incumbent share in DSL connections
bit ¼ β0 þ Mitβ1
ð4Þ
where Mit denotes markup determinants. The location parameter ait can be specified as
ait ¼ α0 þ Ditα1 þ Citα2
ð5Þ
where Dit denotes demand factors and Cit denotes cost determinants. For instance, demand for broadband is expected to
increase with a higher level of income, a higher share of pupils and students, and a higher penetration rate of computers. On
the supply side, a higher population density may decrease the costs of deployment and increase broadband penetration via
lower prices. There may be also economies of scale in broadband supply since a greater number of households in a local
market can lower costs and prices leading to higher penetration. LLU prices also influence the cost of entrants and may
influence broadband penetration.
As suggested by some of the previous studies, there is a potential endogeneity issue of the HHI inter-platform index, see
Distaso et al. (2006) and Bouckaert et al. (2010). A higher concentration of broadband market suggests that there is little
competition which may result in lower broadband penetration. However, an unobserved positive shock to demand for
broadband may have a positive impact on entry of different broadband platforms and the HHI index will decrease. Hence, an
OLS regression may overestimate the effect of the HHI index on market penetration. The argumentation as to why
incumbent share in DSL connections may be endogenous is similar. As mentioned by Bouckaert et al. (2010), the
endogeneity issue may be mitigated to some extent by inclusion of fixed or random effects because the unobserved
region-specific factors are then filtered out.
5. Estimation results
Tables 3 and 4 present the estimation results for Eqs. (1) and (3), respectively. We estimate these equations using both
random and fixed effects regressions. These models control for all time-invariant differences between regions absorbing the
impact of variables which do not vary significantly over time. The fixed effects regression allows for the fixed effects to be
correlated with the independent variables. The random effects regression, on the other hand, takes into account the
presence of region-specific effects which are assumed to be uncorrelated with the independent variables. If the assumption
on the random effects holds, the random effects model is more efficient than the fixed effects model. But if this assumption
does not hold, the random effects model is not consistent. To decide between the fixed and random effects models we use
the Hausman test, in which the null hypothesis is that the unique errors are not correlated with the regressors, i.e., the
preferred model is the random effects model.
5.1. Linear demand function
First, we estimate linear demand specification, the results of which are shown in Table 3. Broadband penetration is
regressed on prices for a fully unbundled loop connection, inter-platform HHI and incumbent share in DSL connections.8 The
following socioeconomic variables are included to control for observed heterogeneity across regions due to differences in
demand and cost factors: GDP per capita (in 1000 Euros on NUTS 1 level), population density (in 1000 per km2 on NUTS 1
8 As an alternative specification we used prices for shared access connection which are also significant with a negative coefficient in all the
specifications.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
101

level), number of households (in 1000 on NUTS 1 level), pupils and students (as % of population on NUTS 1 level), and share
of households with computers (as % on country level). In addition, we include a time trend variable represented by the
number of years passed since the launch of broadband in the country. We control for unobserved heterogeneity by
estimating both random and fixed effects models. In the case of linear specification, the Hausman test with statistics
χ2 ¼ 52:9 allows us to reject the null hypothesis that the random effects are not correlated with the regressors with a
significance level of 0.001. Also, in the case of log–log specification, the Hausman test with statistics χ2 ¼ 36:9 allows to
reject the null hypothesis with a significance level of 0.001. Hence, for both specifications the fixed effects model is preferred
to the random effects model.
The estimation results are as follows. In all the regressions, HHI is found to be significant and negative which suggests
that a higher level of inter-platform concentration, i.e., less inter-platform competition, has a negative effect on broadband
penetration. This result is consistent with findings in most of the previous studies. In general, HHI takes higher values in
countries in which DSL broadband has a higher share due to country-specific policies towards broadband and because of
historical reasons. In Western Europe for instance, DSL has been the most common technology for Internet access based on
the telephone network developed before liberalization of telecommunications markets in 1998. On the other hand, in the
post-socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe, where telecommunications infrastructure inherited from the
socialism era was in a poor state before liberalization in the early 2000s, alternative technologies were rolled out and
taken up more swiftly than in the old Member States. The estimation results suggest that after controlling for differences in
GDP per capita and other socioeconomic variables, broadband penetration tends to be higher in countries in which
alternative technologies to DSL have significant market shares. As an additional test, we estimate two alternative regressions
in which HHI is replaced by market share of DSL and by market share of cable modem. The impact of DSL market share is
significant and negative and the impact of cable modem market share is significant and positive, which confirms that inter-
platform competition stimulates broadband penetration.
Apart from inter-platform competition, also more competition on DSL platform has a significant and positive impact on
broadband penetration, except fixed effects linear specification. The competition on DSL platform is approximated by two
variables. First, LLU prices represent the cost of entry and provision of broadband services on the incumbent's DSL network.
We find that lower prices for a fully unbundled local loop connection have a significant and positive impact on broadband
penetration in all the regressions. In general, lower LLU prices may encourage entry and imply lower costs for the entrants
enabling them to charge lower prices. Second, we find that incumbent share in DSL connections has a negative impact on
broadband penetration. As discussed above, the lower level of intra-platform competition in the new EU countries may be
offset by a higher level of inter-platform competition.
Some socioeconomic variables are significant in explaining heterogeneity across regions depending on the specification.
GDP per capita which approximates the income effect commonly found in the previous studies is significant and positive
only in the random effects models. Density of population is not significant except the random effects estimation of the log–
log specification, in which it is significant and positive. This is a proxy for the cost of deployment of broadband because it is
less expensive to provide broadband services in small geographic areas which are densely populated. The number of
households is not significant in both linear and log–log specifications. This suggests lack of economies of scale and local
market size effect. The share of pupils and students is statistically significant with a negative impact on broadband adoption
in the fixed effects regressions and insignificant in the random effects regressions. This result is rather counterintuitive
because we would expect a greater demand for broadband in areas with a higher share of pupils and students. Broadband
penetration is on the other hand higher in countries with a higher share of households having computers at home as
expected. The computer penetration is significant and positive in all the regressions except the fixed effects linear demand
specification. Time trend variable is significant and positive in all the specifications due to the fact that broadband
penetration has been continuously growing in the last years.
We explain broadband penetration on NUTS 1 level using a mix of socioeconomic variables on NUTS 1 level and country-
level competition and regulation variables. In general, we may expect more inter-platform competition in local markets with
greater population size, higher density of population and higher GDP per capita, which are also markets with higher
broadband penetration. The impact of inter-platform HHI on broadband penetration should be higher for NUTS 1 level data
than for country-level data. The same argumentation holds for the incumbent share in DSL connections. To verify this we
estimate additional regression using country-level broadband data in years 2006–2010 with the same set of explanatory
variables. The number of observations is reduced to 133 for 27 EU countries. In this regression, the coefficient on HHI index
of −0.139 in fixed effects regression (−0.154 in random effects regression) is smaller than in NUTS 1 level fixed effects
regressions of −0.148 (−0.184 in random effects regression) from Table 3. The incumbent's share in DSL connections is
insignificant. The insignificance may be due to the fact that this regression uses a smaller number of observations and there
is less variation in data on broadband penetration.
5.2. Logistic diffusion
The estimation of the logistic diffusion function yields results which are comparable to linear demand estimation, as
shown in Table 4. The dependant variable is the logarithm of the number of potential adopters who do not have broadband
yet relative to the maximum number of adopters given by Eq. (3). We estimate both fixed and random effects models. The
Hausman test with statistics χ2 ¼ 66:1 allows us to reject the null hypothesis that the random effects are not correlated with
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
102

the regressors with a significance level of 0.001. Hence, the fixed effects model is preferred to the random effects model.
Apart from the dependent variable, the difference between the linear demand model and the logistic diffusion function is
that socioeconomic factors and LLU prices are assumed to influence the location parameter, i.e., broadband penetration at a
given point of time, while inter-platform Herfindahl index, market shares of different broadband technologies and
incumbent share in DSL connections are assumed to influence the diffusion speed parameter. This is the common way in
which competition variables were introduced in diffusion function estimation in the previous studies.
In both fixed and random effects regressions, HHI is found to be negative and significant which suggests that a higher
level of platform concentration has a negative effect on the speed of broadband diffusion. Again, we estimate two alternative
regressions in which HHI is replaced by market share of DSL and cable modem. Broadband diffusion is slower in countries
with a higher DSL market share which is found to be significant and negative, while the impact of the share of cable modem
is significant and positive. This confirms that inter-platform competition stimulates the speed of broadband diffusion. Also,
incumbent share in DSL connections has a significant and negative impact on broadband penetration in both fixed and
random effects regressions. Thus, both inter- and intra-platform competition accelerates broadband diffusion. The LLU
prices are however found to be insignificant.
Some socioeconomic variables are significant in explaining the heterogeneity across regions with respect to broadband
penetration depending on the specification. GDP per capita is significant in both fixed and random effects regressions.
Density of population is not significant. The number of households has a significant and positive impact on broadband
diffusion in the fixed effects regression but it is not significant in the random effects regression. The share of pupils and
students is statistically significant with a negative effect on broadband diffusion in the fixed effects regression but it is
insignificant in the random effects regression. Broadband penetration is higher in countries with a higher share of
households having computers at home.
6. Conclusions
Universal access to broadband is critical for the creation of the information society and economic progress. It is therefore
important to analyze the determinants of broadband penetration with a particular focus on inter- and intra-platform
competition and regulation in order to provide guidance on government policies towards deployment of broadband.
In general, the previous studies analyzed determinants of broadband diffusion using country-level panel data and found
that inter-platform competition stimulates broadband diffusion, while intra-platform competition has a positive impact on
Table 3
Estimation results for penetration regression.
Variables
Linear specification
Variables
Log–log specification
FE
RE
FE
RE
gdp
−0.0001
0.0019nnn
log(gdp)
0.159
0.121nnn
(−0.49)
(2.68)
(1.47)
(3.02)
density
−0.040
0.006
log(density)
−0.015
0.029
(−1.11)
(0.67)
(−0.39)
(1.69)
num-house
0.044
−0.002
log(num-house)
0.104
−0.027
(1.55)
(−0.48)
(1.34)
(−1.31)
students
−1.915nnn
0.289
log(students)
−1.636nnn
0.126
(−2.66)
(1.08)
(−3.77)
(0.86)
pc-pen
0.001
−0.395nnn
log(pc-pen)
0.409nnn
0.612nnn
(0.99)
(6.31)
(4.83)
(8.57)
years-intro
0.061nnn
0.046nnn
years-intro
0.105nnn
0.094nnn
(14.58)
(13.67)
(11.69)
(12.14)
hhi-inter
−0.148nnn
−0.184nnn
log(hhi-inter)
−0.251nnn
−0.317nnn
(−6.42)
(−8.60)
(−6.07)
(−8.95)
llu-full
−0.0004nnn
−0.0005nnn
log(llu-full)
−0.051nnn
−0.069nnn
(−3.24)
(−4.44)
(−2.38)
(−3.77)
dsl-share
−0.114
−0.155nnn
log(dsl-share)
−0.494nnn
−0.281nnn
(−1.54)
(−3.94)
(−3.37)
(−4.21)
Intercept
0.481nnn
0.006
Intercept
−4.732nnn
−1.417nnn
(2.85)
(0.93)
(6.28)
(−4.78)
Observations
385
385
385
385
Groups
96
96
96
96
t statistics are in parentheses. Variables in the log–log demand specification are all expressed in logarithm except the variable “years-intro” which
represents time trend.
n Significance at 10% level.
nn Significance at 5% level.
nnn Significance at 1% level.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
103

broadband penetration in the short run, if at all. But there are also studies which found that competition on the incumbent's
DSL platform has a positive impact on broadband diffusion, while inter-platform competition does not matter at all.
In this paper, we use data for 96 NUTS 1 regions in the EU to analyze the impact of competition and regulation on
broadband penetration. The advantage of our paper is that we use more detailed data than country-level which allows us to
control for regional heterogeneity more accurately. We include in the regression analysis socioeconomic variables to control
for observable heterogeneity between regions and account for unobserved heterogeneity by estimating fixed and random
effects models. Our results suggest that policies promoting both inter- and intra-platform competition matter for broadband
diffusion. We find that a higher value of inter-platform HHI results in lower broadband penetration. Broadband deployment
is lower in countries in which DSL has a greater share in Internet access and higher in countries in which cable modem has a
greater share in Internet access. We also find that a higher incumbent share in DSL connections decreases broadband
penetration. Furthermore, prices for a fully unbundled local loop connection, which represent the cost of providing copper-
based Internet services, have a significant and negative impact on broadband penetration.
Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Telecom Paris Tech and the Economic Research Southern Africa.
References
Bouckaert, J., van Dijk, T., & Verboven, F. (2010). Access regulation, competition, and broadband penetration: An international study. Telecommunications
Policy, 34, 661–671.
Czernich, N., Falck, O., Kretschmer, T., & Woessmann, L. (2011). Broadband infrastructure and economic growth. Economic Journal, 121, 505–532.
Denni, M., & Gruber, H. (2007). The diffusion of broadband telecommunications in the U.S.—the role of different forms of competition. Communications and
Strategies, 68, 139.
Distaso, W., Lupi, P., & Manenti, F. M. (2006). Platform competition and broadband uptake: Theory and empirical evidence from the European Union.
Information Economics and Policy, 18, 87–106.
Gruber, H., & Koutroumpis, P. (2011). Competition enhancing regulation and diffusion of innovation: The case of broadband networks. Working Paper.
Gruber, H., & Verboven, F. (2001). The diffusion of mobile telecommunications services in the European Union. European Economic Review, 45, 577–588.
Lee, S., & Brown, J. S. (2008). The diffusion of fixed broadband: An empirical analysis (pp. 08–19). NET Institute Working Paper.
Lee, S., Lee, S., & Marcu, M. (2011). An empirical analysis of fixed and mobile broadband diffusion. Information Economics and Policy, 23, 227–233.
Table 4
Estimation results for logistic regression.
Variables
FE
RE
Location variables
gdp
0.027nnn
0.022nnn
(3.66)
(−6.08)
density
−0.146
–0.026
(0.91)
(0.55)
num-house
0.337nnn
0.005
(−3.02)
(0.21)
students
−11.16nnn
1.601
(3.66)
(−1.24)
pc-pen
0.634n
2.221nnn
(−1.64)
(−8.15)
llu-full
−0.0001
−0.001
(1.29)
(1.18)
Intercept
–0.261
−2.891nnn
(0.33)
(9.99)
Diffusion variables
Time*hhi-inter
−0.133nnn
−0.183nnn
(3.35)
(4.86)
Time*dsl-share
−0.241nnn
−0.270nnn
(5.48)
(7.74)
Time
0.485nnn
0.481nnn
(13.39)
(−13.99)
Observations
385
385
Groups
96
96
t statistics are in parentheses.
n Significance at 10% level.
nn Significance at 5% level.
nnn Significance at 1% level.
M. Dauvin, L. Grzybowski / Telecommunications Policy 38 (2014) 96–104
104


============================================================
FILE: koutroumpis2009impact.pdf
============================================================
The economic impact of broadband on growth:
A simultaneous approach
Pantelis Koutroumpis
Imperial College Business School, UK
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
Broadband
Economic growth
Simultaneous equations
Critical mass
a b s t r a c t
This paper investigates how broadband penetration affects economic growth. A
macroeconomic production function with a micro-model for broadband investment is
used to estimate the impact of broadband infrastructure and growth. The results
indicate
a
signiﬁcant
causal
positive
link
especially
when
a
critical
mass
of
infrastructure is present. The scope of this research is 22 OECD countries based on
data collected for the period 2002–2007.
& 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Explaining the determinants of economic growth ranks among the most active ﬁelds in economics. Fifty years ago
economists considered technological change as the single most important parameter for growth and labor productivity
(Abramovitz, 1986; Kendrick, 1956; Solow, 1957). The models that were used to measure the technological effects on
growth varied signiﬁcantly from the endogenous approach – ‘growth driven by technological change that arises from
intentional investments of proﬁt maximizing individuals’ (Romer, 1990) to the earlier aggregate production functions with
exogenous technological changes (Solow, 1957). Ever since, a large number of studies have commented on these models
(Fisher, 1969) and attempted to disentangle the determinants of growth (Barro & Sala-i-Martin, 2003, p. 346; Mankiw,
Romer, & Weil, 1992; ). Perhaps the most convincing evidence in favor of the technological developments as a growth
engine comes from Rosenberg (1972, p. 59) providing a comprehensive survey of the aforementioned relationship for the
American economy since the 1800s.
This paper attempts to measure the economic impact of the telecommunications infrastructure on growth and more
speciﬁcally the effects of broadband infrastructure. The growing numbers of internet subscribers worldwide make this
study particularly important. This issue has also received considerable regulatory and public policy attention especially in
the developed countries. This paper uses evidence from 22 OECD countries over 6 years to estimate the impact of
broadband infrastructure.
Investment in infrastructure affects growth and broadband infrastructure is no exception to this rule. Aschauer (1989),
Munnell (1992) and Gramlich (1994) focus on the effects of infrastructure and its relationship to growth and provide
evidence for its existence. Broadband infrastructure investment can increase economic growth in various ways. More
obviously the equipment, the drilling and the ductwork lead to increases in the demand of goods and services. This ﬁrst
level of infrastructural investment is nevertheless not as signiﬁcant as the utility derived from the use of the network.
Broadband networks provide the framework for the delivery of different services ranging from telephony and its
variants (PSTN, VoIP and video phones) to high-speed internet access and very diverse multimedia services (video
streaming, online games, tele-working, etc.). Speed of connection guarantees the provision of information and decreases
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
URL: www.elsevierbusinessandmanagement.com/locate/telpol
Telecommunications Policy
ARTICLE IN PRESS
0308-5961/$ - see front matter & 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2009.07.004
E-mail address: p.koutroumpis06@imperial.ac.uk
Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485

search and transaction times. As such this technology improves the capabilities of the labor force and the communication
between ﬁrms. The use of this infrastructure spreads to other industries and contributes to their proﬁts thus affecting their
overall growth. While the telecommunications industry is primarily affected by the infrastructure itself the important
spillovers of broadband networks result in externalities in the other sectors of the economy.
Measuring the returns of public infrastructure has received considerable attention and debate. The results of some early
studies have often been found to suffer from simultaneity bias and spurious correlation.1 More recent papers account for
these issues either by incorporating ﬁrst differences approach2 or by moving to smaller data aggregation.3 Munnell (1992)
supports that the ‘legitimate’ criticism to the public infrastructure debate should focus on reverse causation – thus
implying that the direction of causation may run from output to infrastructure as well.4 Clearly the same issues of reverse
causality and spurious correlation could exist in the broadband infrastructure. This essentially translates into two different
effects: (a) the increase of economic growth due to increases in broadband infrastructure and its externalities and (b) the
increase in the demand of broadband services due to higher economic output. Thus it is vital to explicitly disentangle the
effect of growth on the infrastructure in order to measure the intended effect. In this paper I estimate the effect of
broadband infrastructure on growth using a simultaneous equations model. This model endogenizes broadband
investment by incorporating broadband supply, demand and output equations. The system is then jointly estimated
with a macroproduction function hence accounting for the simultaneity effects.5 The model used in this paper is based on
the telecommunications (telephony) infrastructure model used by Roeller and Waverman (2001).
Broadband networks share some common features with other public infrastructure investments. However, the
information intensity and the breadth of activities that can be supported by high-level software applications – ranging from
business critical processes to entertainment and e-learning – are some of their unique characteristics. Moreover some very
important parameters regarding the deployment of these networks are their reach to thinly populated or rural areas and
the level of participation that they attract. Where the state of the infrastructure is rudimentary inter-ﬁrm communications
are limited. Broadband networks – as with most networks – are also size dependent. Various models have been studied in
terms of the value of a computer network relative to its size (Briscoe, Odlyzko, & Tilly, 2006; Metcalfe, 1995; Reed, 1999),
which unanimously ﬁnd that there is at least6 a proportional link between the two values. Thus, the inclusion of more
subscribers increases the size of the network and the overall gains to its members. These gains might have an impact on
productivity, education and social welfare.7 From the ﬁrms’ perspective a wider audience makes the platform more
attractive for investments. These types of beneﬁts are not existent in the transportation or the utilities networks and
account for the externalities of broadband networks. The question behind this situation is whether there are actually
certain speciﬁc network size-levels where these externalities appear. This would imply that once a critical mass of
broadband penetration is achieved the relative returns to growth should rise in a more than expected trend.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First I describe some related studies and their ﬁndings. Then I present the
model and the particular discussion for each equation. After that I present the data and some summary statistics. Finally I
discuss the results and some future remarks about this area of research.
2. Related studies
There has been a considerable amount of empirical work on the economic impact of telecommunications on growth.
The methodologies that have been used vary on issues like data availability and different econometric speciﬁcations. The
broad outcome of these studies concludes to a positive and signiﬁcant link between telecommunications infrastructure and
growth. The discussion below follows a chronological order of the relevant studies and focuses on their outcomes. Since
telecommunications technology has undergone important changes in the last 15 years the focus of the earlier studies is
mainly on the telephony network.
An early study by Hardy (1980) used a group of 60 countries for the period 1960–1973 in order to measure the role of
telephone usage on economic development. The regressions show a signiﬁcant impact of tele-density (telephone lines per
capita) on GDP per capita. However, a separate estimation for developed and developing countries shows that the results
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1 See Aschauer (1989).
2 Aaron (1990), Hulten and Schwab (1984), Jorgenson (1991), Tatom (1991).
3 From country data to state and regional data the estimates of the output elasticity of public capital dwindles. Munnell (1992) states that these
changes are attributed to ‘leakages’ because ‘yone can not capture all of the payoff to an infrastructure investment by looking at a small geographic area’.
4 Eberts and Fogarty (1987) examined the question of causality by looking at public and private investment data from 1904 to 1978 for 40
metropolitan areas. They found causation running in both directions. Their analysis indicated that public investment led private investment in cities that
experienced most of their growth before the 1950s, while the reverse was true for southern cities and cities that grew faster since 1950.
5 The time and country ﬁxed effects that are applied control for the spurious correlation that arises from other non-broadband-speciﬁc local
investments. Other econometric controls, e.g. standard error clustering for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation, are applied to the model as well. The
standard error clustering estimates are ﬁrst clustered by country, estimated in single equations and then put in the simultaneous equations model.
6 Metcalfe ﬁnds that the value of the network is proportional to the square of its size. Reed supports that its value grows exponentially to its size.
There is also a more conservative view that the value grows proportionally to n log(n), where n is the number of people connected (Briscoe et al., 2006).
7 Productivity gains in terms of time saving and increased quality, education gains because of e-learning activities and social welfare gains due to the
wide awareness and open dialogue for several issues. Forum participants discuss – asynchronously or real time – and learn about ecology, politics,
medical advancements, etc. with any other user of the web.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
472

are not signiﬁcant. The existence of important ﬁxed effects or the reverse causality might be possible explanations to these
results (Roeller & Waverman, 2001).
Leff (1984) analyzes ‘the welfare effects of investment in telecommunications facilities (primarily telephone) in
developing countries’ and used cross-section data on 47 developed and developing countries. The econometric results
indicate that the relationship between telecommunications infrastructure and economic growth is positive and signiﬁcant.
Cronin, Parker, Colleran, and Gold (1991) using time series analyses of 31 years of US data (1958–1988) ﬁnd a
statistically signiﬁcant causal relationship between productivity growth and telecommunications. In this setting the level
of US economic activity at any point in time is a ‘reliable predictor of the amount of US telecommunications investment at a
later point’ in time and ‘the amount of US telecommunications investment at any point in time is a reliable predictor of the
level of US economic activity at a later point in time’.
Greenstein and Spiller (1995) study the impact of telecommunication infrastructure on a country’s economic activity in
two sectors: ﬁre, insurance and real estate; and manufacturing. The framework used to measure the effect of the
infrastructure on long-run economic activity is a pooled cross-section time series equation and the dataset spreads from
1986 to 1992. The results indicate that modernization of the telephone network is associated with more ﬁre, insurance and
real estate activity in the local region, while it is not associated with more manufacturing. Once other determinants of
growth are controlled for, a doubling of ﬁber optic cable leads to at least a 10%, and possibly a much higher, increase in the
level of economic activity in ﬁre, insurance and real estate.
Madden and Savage (1998) empirically examine the relationship between gross ﬁxed investment, telecommunications
infrastructure investment and economic growth for a sample of transitional economies in Central and Eastern Europe. In
particular, they focus on empirically determining the direction of inﬂuence, and timing, between investment and growth.
The ﬁnding that telecommunication investment, especially when measured by main telephone lines, is related to economic
growth is a key outcome of the study. This result suggests that improving the chronic underinvestment in the
telecommunications infrastructures of Central and Eastern European countries may ultimately improve the channel
between aggregate investment and growth, economy-wide.
Madden and Savage (2000) point to the absence of investment data for many developing countries and questions the
practice of using main telephone lines to measure the stock of telecommunications capital since the accuracy of this proxy
has not been subject to careful statistical scrutiny. They, thus, develop a supplyside growth model which employs tele-
density and the share of telecommunications investment in national income as telecommunications capital proxies. The
results suggest ‘a signiﬁcant positive cross-country relationship between telecommunications capital and economic
growth, when using alternative measures of telecommunications capital’.
A study by Roller and Waverman (2001) jointly estimates a micro-model for telecommunications investment
with a macroproduction function for the OECD group of countries for the period 1970–1990. They ﬁnd a strong causal
relationship between telecommunications infrastructure and productivity, and additionally they indicate that this occurs
only when telecommunications services reach a certain threshold, which is near universal levels. An adaptation of the
model used by Roeller and Waverman is used in this study while the focus is broadband infrastructure rather than
telephone network.
Sridhar and Sridhar (2004) investigate the simultaneous relationship between telecommunications and the economic
growth, using data for developing countries. Using 3SLS they estimate a system of equations that endogenizes economic
growth and telecom penetration along with supply of telecom investment and growth in telecom penetration. They ﬁnd
that there is a signiﬁcant impact of cellular services on national output, when controlling for the effects of capital and labor.
The impact of telecom penetration on total output is found to be signiﬁcantly lower for developing countries than the
reported ﬁgure for OECD countries, dispelling the convergence hypothesis.
Datta and Agarwal (2004) empirically investigate the role of telecommunication infrastructure on long-run economic
growth for a sample of 22 OECD countries. Using panel data and a dynamic ﬁxed-effects method for estimation they
account for omitted variable bias of single cross-section regression. The results show that telecommunications is both
statistically signiﬁcant and positively correlated with growth in real GDP per capita growth for these countries. The results
are robust even after controlling for investment, government consumption, population growth, openness, past levels of
GDP and lagged growth. The results further indicate that the telecommunications investment is subject to diminishing
returns, suggesting thereby that countries at an earlier stage of development are likely to gain the most from investing in
telecom infrastructure.
Lehr, Gillett, Osorio, and Sirbu (2006) present a ﬁrst attempt to measure broadband’s impact by applying controlled
econometric techniques to national-scale data. After controlling for community-level factors that affect broadband
availability and economic outcomes (income, education and urban vs. rural character) the results show that broadband
access enhances economic growth and performance, and that the economic impact of broadband is real and measurable. In
particular they ﬁnd that for the period 1998–2002 communities in which mass-market broadband became available by
December 1999 experienced more rapid growth in employment, the number of businesses overall and businesses in IT-
intensive sectors. They do not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant impact on wages but the higher market rents imply an impact on
property values.
Duggal, Saltzman, and Klein (2007) incorporate both public and private infrastructure within the framework of a
nonlinear production function. Their model speciﬁes a technological growth rate as a nonlinear function of government
infrastructure and private infrastructure generated by the information sector of the economy – cable, wireless stations,
ARTICLE IN PRESS
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
473

satellites, internet facilities, broadcasting, etc. The empirical estimates generated by the model imply increasing returns to
scale for the US economy in the last few years. The evaluation of the growth accounting equation implies that information
technology was the largest contributing component to growth during the expansion of the 1990s.
Greenstein and McDevitt (2009) measure the economic value of broadband in terms of revenue and consumer surplus
for a US sample between 1999 and 2006. They ﬁnd that broadband accounted for $28 billion of the Internet access revenue
with households generating $20 to $22 billion of this revenue. The additional revenue created between 1999 and 2006 was
approximately $8.3 to $10.6 billion. That replacement is associated with $4.8 to $6.7 billion in consumer surplus, which is
not measured via Gross Domestic Product (GDP). An Internet-access Consumer Price Index (CPI) would have to decline by
1.6% to 2.2% per year for it to reﬂect the creation of value.
3. Econometric model
As mentioned previously the approach used here is a structural econometric model within a production
function framework that endogenizes telecommunications investment. The reason for using this type of model is the
following. The effect we are trying to capture is a two-way relationship between growth and broadband infra-
structure. While we do expect wealthier people to have higher demand for goods and services we want to estimate
how much the country’s growth might be affected by their use of the broadband networks. In order to illustrate this causal
link between the two variables we use this model that explicitly disentangles the values in a simultaneous equations
model. Therefore a micro-model of supply and demand is speciﬁed and jointly estimated with the macroproduction
equation. This way while endogenizing for the investment we can control for the causal effects of this two-way
relationship.
The national aggregate economic output (GDP) is used in the production function and is related to labor and
capital in each country. In particular the stock of capital net of telecommunications capital (K), the stock of human
capital (HK) and the stock of broadband infrastructure (BROADBAND). The stock of broadband infrastructure is needed
rather than the broadband investment because consumers demand infrastructure and not investment per se. The model
used here is based on the Roeller and Waverman (2001) simultaneous equations model. The aggregate production function
is as follows:
GDPit ¼ fðKit; HKit; BROADBANDitÞ
There is a wide literature about the strong relationship between stock of capital and labor force in a country with the
GDP. The variable for capital used here is split between telecommunications capital BROADBANDit and all other capital Kit.
The telecommunications capital for the 22 OECD countries is measured by their broadband infrastructure and not by their
ﬁxed telephony infrastructure. The reason for that is that the country sample has higher than 100% penetration in ﬁxed
telephony thus indicating homogeneity in this kind of infrastructure.8 Building broadband infrastructure requires both
access and backbone network investments on top of the legacy infrastructure. Broadband penetration in each country is
used as a proxy for the level of upgrade of the older networks.
In order to differentiate between the effect of BROADBAND on GDP and the inverse we specify the following micro-
model.
3.1. Demand for broadband infrastructure
BROADBANDit ¼ hðGDPCit; BBPrit; EDUit; URBit; RNDitÞ
The demand equation states that broadband penetration is a function of GDP per capita, the price of a standard service
for the connection to the network, the percent of GDP spent on education, the percentage of the population that lives in
densely populated areas and the percent of GDP spent on public or private research and development.
3.2. Supply of broadband infrastructure
BBIit ¼ gðBBPrit; InterPlatformit; RegulationitÞ
The supply equation links the aggregate broadband investment in a country to broadband price levels for that period, the
level of inter-platform competition in the broadband market and the mandate of local loop unbundling on the incumbent’s
network as a measure of regulatory control. All these parameters affect potential and existing operators as well as the
dynamic of the supply side of the market.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
8 All countries in the sample have higher than 40 main telephone lines per 100 inhabitants indicating that all homes are served by the ﬁxed telephony
network (2.5 people living in each house)—ITU statistics 2007.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
474

3.3. Broadband infrastructure production function
BROADBANDi;t  BROADBANDi;t1 ¼ kðBBIitÞ
The infrastructure equation states that the annual change in broadband penetration is a function of the capital invested
in a country during 1 year. It is important to note that the difference in penetration levels is a function of the infrastructural
change that is already used and utilized by the citizens of a country. There might be other parts of the invested capital –
part of the BBI variable – that have not yet been realized and used by the people.
These three equations endogenize broadband infrastructure because they involve the supply and demand of broadband
infrastructure. A detailed version of the model is as follows:
Aggregate production equation:
logðGDPitÞ ¼ a0 þ a1 log ðKitÞ þ a2 logðLFitÞ þ a3 logðPENitÞ þ 1
it
(1)
Demand equation:
logðPENitÞ ¼ b0 þ b1 logðGDPCitÞ þ b2ðBBPritÞ þ b3ðEDUitÞ þ b4ðURBitÞ þ b5ðRNDitÞ þ 2
it
(2)
Supply equation:
logðBBIitÞ ¼ c0 þ c1 logðBBritÞ þ c2 logðInterPlatformitÞ þ c3 logðRegulationÞ þ 3
it
(3)
Broadband infrastructure production equation:
log
PENit
PENi;t1


¼ d0 þ d1 logðBBIitÞ þ 4
it
(4)
4. Data and correlations
The aim of this part is to investigate and identify certain relationships between the data for the telecommunications
investment – or more speciﬁcally the broadband investment and the economic output. The dataset used for this study uses
annual data from 22 OECD countries for the 6-year-period between 2002 and 2007. The countries used are listed in Table 1.
While the time period for the sample of this study is only 6 years it does manage to capture a very important part of the
growth of broadband networks in the OECD sample. Telecommunications growth literature includes studies with richer
datasets especially in the time domain, sometimes reaching or even existing 20 years of observations. For example, the
Roeller and Waverman (2001) paper used 20 years of observations for the growth attributed to telephony infrastructure. In
absolute terms the average growth in telephony penetration in that paper was 22.2% (from 20.38% in 1971 to 42.58% in
1990). In the present sample the absolute change in broadband penetration is a bit less and equal to 18.66% (from 4.87%
in 2002 to 23.53% in 2007). The relative change in the telephony paper was 52% and for the broadband paper 79%.
Moreover the average annual growth rate for telephony was 3.95% compared to 37.02% in the broadband case. Had
broadband the same annual growth rate as telephony for that period this would translate into a sample of more than 40
years of observations. From these facts related to the size of the current sample we can see that there are several qualitative
characteristics that make the present study more interesting.
The data used have been collected by various sources depending on their nature and availability. World Bank online
resources were used to obtain information related to GDP, GDPC, labor force – population with full or part time work aged
15–64, education and research and development funding as percentage of GDP. The Groeningen Growth Accounting
Database was used to obtain information about the nonresidential capital stock net of telecommunications investment and
the total telecommunications investment. A combination of data from OECD statistics and International Telecommunica-
tions Unions statistics was used to construct the variable of the broadband price which utilized a level of constant speed at
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
OECD countries used in the dataset.
Australia
Luxembourgh
Austria
Japan
Belgium
Netherlands
Canada
New Zealand
Denmark
Norway
France
Portugal
Germany
Spain
Greece
Sweden
Hungary
Switzerland
Ireland
United Kingdom
Italy
United States
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
475

ﬂat rate contract to obtain an unbiased benchmark of the price levels. For the demographics of the dataset, i.e. the
urbanization variable (people living in areas with more than 500 inhabitants per sq. kilometer per 100 population) the
Population Division of the World Urbanization Project from the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
provided the data. OECD and ITU statistics were used to obtain penetration levels – population with a broadband
connection per 100 population. Finally the Inter-platform variable was constructed from ITU data as well as the regulation
variable. These variables are computed with the following equations:
InterPlatformij ¼
X
n
1
Platformm
Total BB

2
(5)
Regulationit ¼ Full LLU þ Shared LLU
ðTotal BB ConnectionsÞ
(6)
The platforms taken into account are DSL, Cable, Fiber and other broadband. Therefore the range of this metric is
0.25oInterPlatformijo1. Table 2 contains the variables used in the model. The subscripts i and t correspond to country and
time values, respectively.
The summary statistics are presented in Table 3 and some more information about the data is included in the Appendix.
Before turning to the results there are some important correlations in the dataset. From these we will focus on the
correlation between broadband penetration level and GDPC for the sample countries for the year 2006. As we can see in
Fig. 1 there is a clear trend followed by the participating countries. This graph is intended to enrich the understanding
about the causal link that we need to describe. While Luxemburg is an obvious outlier in the graph the rest of the countries
seem to be closely scattered around the trend line.
5. Results
The model is estimated using two different methods. The ﬁrst incorporates single instrumental variable estimates
which control for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity consistency and the second uses nonlinear general method of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 2
Variables used in the model and descriptions.
GDPit
GDP in millions USD ($)
World Bank statistics
GDPCit
GDPC in USD ($)
World Bank statistics
Kit
Non-residential stock of telecommunications investment in millions USD ($)
GGDC growth accounting statistics
PENit
Level of broadband penetration in 100 inhabitants
OECD and ITU statistics
BBPrit
Price of 1 Mbyte per second of ﬂat rate internet connection (no data or time caps)
ITU statistics, OECD statistics
URBit
Percent of population living in areas with densities higher than 500 inhabitants per
square kilometer
United Nations, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Population Division (2007)
World Urbanization Prospects
EDUit
Percentage of GDP spent for education (%)
World Bank statistics
RDit
Level of public and private investment in research and development as percentage of
GDP(%)
World Bank statistics
BBIit
Stock of telecommunications investment in millions USD ($)
GGDC growth accounting statistics
LFit
Population with full or part time work aged 15–64 in thousands
World Bank statistics
Interplatit
Herﬁndahl index equal to the sum of squares of broadband connections per platform
(Cable, DSL, FTTH) divided by the square of the total number of broadband connections
ITU statistics
Regit
Percent of DSL lines over local loop unbundling relatively to total broadband
ITU statistics
Table 3
Variables and summary statistics.
Variable
Obs.
Std. dev.
Min.
Max.
GDP ($ millions, constant 2000)
132
2,360,000
2160
11,563,600
GDPC ($, constant 2000)
132
9097
14,134
67,767
Labor (thousands population)
132
64,069
446
301,621
Non ICT stock of capital ($ millions, constant 2000)
132
3280.31
25.88
17,502
Broadband penetration (%)
132
8.79
0
36.23
Education (%)
132
1.13
3.49
8.44
Broadband price ($, constant 2000)
132
58.61
0.60
230.00
Research and development (%)
132
0.82
0.48
3.95
Urbanization (%)
132
10.42
55.68
97.34
Broadband investment ($ millions, constant 2000)
132
7450
71.3
3620
Inter-platform index (HHI)
132
0.19
0.31
1
Regulation (%)
132
0.11
0
0.50
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
476

moments system estimation. The limited information estimator (instrumental variables estimations on each equation) has
the advantage of recognizing misspeciﬁcations in the equations. Thus the estimates of the other equations remain intact
with the single equations estimates. However, if the speciﬁcation is correct the system estimators provide more precise
coefﬁcient estimates. The use of both speciﬁcations allows us to control for the correctness of the system speciﬁcation and
to obtain more insightful estimates from the model (Wooldridge, 2001, p. 209).
The results of the model are shown in Table 4. There are four different estimations of the model equations. The ﬁrst two
columns of the table present the results for the single equation estimates and the two others the results for the three stages
least squares estimates of the model. The ﬁrst estimation of the model is a rather simpliﬁed one. It does not control for
country ﬁxed effects (column 1, Table 4). From the econometrics point of view this can be translated into the intercept in
the aggregate production equation (1) held constant. The estimated parameters for the aggregate production equation
indicate that labor and capital are both positive and signiﬁcantly associated with the GDP. In line with the growth
literature, the education coefﬁcient is signiﬁcant and with a positive sign too. The elasticities for labor and capital are 0.091
and 0.917, respectively. For the same model when country and time ﬁxed effects are taken into account the coefﬁcients of
labor and capital remain positive and signiﬁcant.
The effect that we are trying to capture is mainly associated with the impact of the penetration rate in the
aggregate production equation. From the ﬁrst column of Table 4 with the results, we can see that the coefﬁcient of
the penetration rate is signiﬁcant and positive. This suggests that an increase in broadband adoption and use
generates signiﬁcant aggregate economic output. The magnitude of this effect can be calculated and results in a practical
estimate of this positive relationship between broadband and GDP. The point estimate of the elasticity is roughly equal to
0.025 which implies that 1% increase in the penetration rate – described by the variable PEN in our model – increases
economic growth by an average of 0.025%. The corresponding estimate for the ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcation is 0.023. In order
to get an idea of the magnitude of the result that we have calculated we ﬁrst have to ﬁnd a way to estimate the
compounded annual growth effect of broadband on growth (CAGB) for the penetration rate variable. This is the implied
constant growth rate for a period of years that results in a deﬁned future value. From our dataset we choose Spain,
which has a moderate increase in broadband adoption for the period 2002–2007, and we calculate this effect with a
formula initially used by Roeller and Waverman (2001).9 Spain was 11th in 2002 and 19th in broadband penetration
in 2007. This indicates that it had a medium-low position regarding penetration from the countries in the dataset. For the
year 2002 Spain10 had 3.02% of the population connected to some form of broadband service and by 2007 this had more
than doubled reaching 17.70%. The compound growth rate for the broadband penetration was for this period equal to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. GDPC over broadband penetration in 2006.
9 In order to calculate the effect of broadband penetration on total country growth we use
CAGB ¼
ðPEN2007=ð1  PEN2007ÞÞ  ðPEN2003=ð1  PEN2003ÞÞ
PEN2007=ð1  PEN2007Þ


c
a3 þ 1

1=5
(7)
This formula was used by Roeller and Waverman (2001) as a measure of the annual percent change of broadband penetration multiplied by the
estimated penetration coefﬁcient. It is a measure of the compound annual growth effect of broadband on economic growth.
10 For a full list of all country CAGR of Broadband Penetration and GDP, see Appendix.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
477

42.44%.11 Using Eq. (7) and the preceding estimates of 0.025 and 0.023 we ﬁnd that the compounded annual growth effect
for Spain was roughly 0.42% and 0.39%, respectively. Taking into account the random effects estimation we translate this
value into the overall annual effect of ﬁxed telecommunications infrastructure, which implies that Spain’s investment in
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 4
Estimates of the IV and 3SLS regressions.
Variables
IV GMM estimates
3SLS estimatesa
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
GDPb
Labor force
0.917***
1.169***
0.783***
0.738***
(14.00)
(6.61)
(18.48)
(5.88)
Non ICT stock of capital
0.091***
0.079***
0.154***
0.151***
(3.77)
(3.17)
(4.20)
(2.55)
BB penetration
0.025***
0.023***
0.204***
0.012***
(5.75)
(4.85)
(4.97)
(2.26)
Constant
17.136***
14.778***
17.664***
18.830***
(28.76)
(8.37)
(64.62)
(16.80)
Penetration
GDPC
0.884***
4.531***
0.810***
2.454***
(2.91)
(4.01)
(4.42)
(3.25)
BB price
0.014***
0.012***
0.013***
0.005***
(21.01)
(12.70)
(15.06)
(6.64)
Education
0.169*
0.556***
0.122***
0.925***
(1.78)
(2.30)
(2.73)
(6.00)
R&D
0.034
0.016
0.158***
0.001
(0.38)
(0.14)
(2.59)
(0.01)
Urbanization
0.003
0.116
0.003
0.031
(0.30)
(1.25)
(0.61)
(0.51)
Constant
7.370**
55.539***
6.624***
24.284**
(1.92)
(4.17)
(3.69)
(2.33)
BB investment
BB price
0.001***
0.001***
0.007***
0.001
(3.48)
(3.40)
(3.80)
(0.88)
Inter-platform
0.536*
0.515*
0.157
0.629**
(1.73)
(1.63)
(0.29)
(2.33)
Regulation
0.726*
0.739*
0.020
0.370
(0.167)
(1.68)
(0.02)
(0.90)
Constant
21.975***
21.958***
22.219***
24.312***
(59.41)
(99.81)
(55.95)
(141.04)
DPenetration
BB investment
0.398***
0.087
0.522***
0.142
(8.62)
(0.85)
(12.57)
(1.15)
R2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Growth
0.85
0.85
0.92
0.99
Demand
0.82
0.84
0.72
0.93
Supply
0.17
0.17
0.05
0.98
Broadband output
0.20
0.29
0.34
0.92
Number of observations: 132.
(1) Random effects using single equation IV estimates. Standard errors are clustered by country and year (robust estimates); the statistics are
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent; the kernel used for the AC and HEC covariance estimation is the Newey West (Bartlett).
(2) Fixed country and year effects using single equations IV estimates. Standard errors are clustered by country and year (robust estimates); the statistics
are heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent; the kernel used for the AC and HEC covariance estimation is the Newey West (Bartlett).
(3) Random effects using 3SLS GMM estimates with robust standard errors.
(4) Fixed country and year effects using 3SLS GMM with robust standard errors.
*10% signiﬁcance (t-statistic), **5% signiﬁcance, ***1% signiﬁcance.
a Three-staged least squares estimates with endogenous variables GDP, broadband penetration, broadband investment and Dpenetration.
b Instruments used for the broadband penetration (growth equation): urbanization, research and development and broadband price.
11 This can be calculated using the standard formula for compound aggregate growth rate estimations:
PEN_Growth ¼
PEN2007
PEN2002



1=5
 1
(8)
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
478

broadband infrastructure for the years 2002–2007, boosted aggregate economic output by 0.42% annually. There are
certainly important reasons to expect a contribution in economic output through broadband networks and the externalities
that they create. This estimate attributes to them almost 12.14% a country’s growth (since for Spain the average GDP growth
rate at market prices for the ﬁscal years 2002–2007 was 3.49%12). Nevertheless Spain is one case in the 22-country dataset
with lower and higher penetration rates and different effects on the CAGB. The example is intended to give a practical
glimpse in this ﬁrst model estimation and to provide the fertile ground for further research in the model and more detailed
analysis. Besides, the bigger picture tells us that the OECD countries have had an average 37.02% penetration increase for
the period 2002–2007 and from this the 0.39% of their annual economic growth can be attributed to broadband
infrastructure (almost one-tenth of annual growth13).
The large effects that have been previously discussed are closely related to older studies that showed the extent of the
return from public infrastructural investments. The results that are produced are consistent with the importance of
telecommunications infrastructure and include possible externalities from the widespread availability of information. The
estimated elasticity has to be controlled for parameters that have not yet been evaluated and will be discussed later. One
explanation investigated below is the presence of spurious correlation, which suggests the use of a ﬁxed-effects model. In
other words we expect that the penetration variable picks up other growth-promoting factors not yet taken into account in
the aggregate growth equation.
The focus of the empirical analysis conducted is not on the estimation of the demand and supply relationships in the
broadband services market. However, these results are also discussed below. Therefore as can be seen from Table 4, it is
comforting that most of the remaining parameters are signiﬁcant and robust across the speciﬁcations below. Getting back
to our results the demand equation introduces some interesting insights to the discussion. While broadband price
coefﬁcient is negative and signiﬁcant (Table 4) the GDPC is positive and insigniﬁcant across all speciﬁcations. The
educational level of the population is a critical enabler for all internet and high technology applications and is found to be
positive and signiﬁcant both in the random and in the ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcations. Regarding the estimated coefﬁcient on
the research and development investments variable, this has the expected sign, but is insigniﬁcant at the usual levels.
Urbanization is insigniﬁcant across all speciﬁcations.
Turning to the supply equation we ﬁnd that there is a negative and signiﬁcant relationship between broadband price
and broadband investment, though the degree of signiﬁcance decreases once we introduce ﬁxed effects (column 4). The
level of inter-platform competition is negative and marginally signiﬁcant across most speciﬁcations. This result shows that
the more the broadband market is tilted towards multi-platform competition the higher investments it attracts. Essentially
the heterogeneity in the sample of countries allows us to have some more informative results. The inter-platform
competition variable value ranged from 0.31 for Sweden in 2002 to 1 in Greece in 2003. Contrary to the inter-platform
competition variable the regulation one focused on single platform within-competition. Regulation – as measured by the
percentage of unbundled lines relatively to all the other lines in each country – is found to be insigniﬁcant for the supply
side of the markets. While unbundling has driven diffusion of broadband this effect did not necessarily force investors to
provide capital in new infrastructure.
The last equation reported in Table 4 is the production function relating investment and penetration rate. The context of
this equation is that the difference in the stock of penetration (that is, the ﬂow of annual broadband penetration) is related
to the ﬂow of broadband investment. The relationship between investment and penetration is positive and signiﬁcant for
the random effects speciﬁcations. The degree of signiﬁcance decreases in both ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcations, indicating that
the difference in penetration is not always related to last year’s investment. Perhaps the rise of broadband adoption is a
result of both social conditions and investment dynamics.
We have already mentioned that much of the spurious correlations found in previous single equation studies as well as
random effects experiments disappear once they are econometrically controlled for country and time ﬁxed effects. To test if
this is also apparent in our case we re-estimate the model allowing for a country and time-speciﬁc intercept in all
equations. The results are reported in column (2) of Table 4. Apparently most of the parameter estimates change only
slightly.
For the ﬁrst equation we can see that there is no remarkable change in the labor force coefﬁcient once the intercept is
allowed to vary. The effect is still positive and signiﬁcant and the coefﬁcient increases from 0.917 to 1.169. This can be
partially attributed to the random effects estimation that yields less to labor force than it actually accounts for. The capital
coefﬁcient remains positive and signiﬁcant but now reduced to 0.079. Since the estimates on the remaining variables are
unaltered, we do not repeat their interpretation.
Notably, the estimated coefﬁcient on the penetration rate changes as well. The initial value of 0.025 in the random
effects model now becomes 0.023. This change is not a remarkable one but as suggested by the discussion previously, it was
expected. The signiﬁcance changes for the broadband penetration rate without altering anything else in the equation.
Moreover the implied growth effects are more reasonable than before. If we use the example of Spain again with the new
value for broadband penetration we ﬁnd that the impact of broadband infrastructure on aggregate economic growth to be
at a compounded annual effect of 0.39%. For the OECD countries average this amount is equal to 0.40% of the gross national
ARTICLE IN PRESS
12 Source: World Bank statistics and GDP data in USD per inhabitant at constant 2000 prices, see Appendix for full dataset.
13 The average CAGR for the OECD 22 for the 2002–2007 period was 3.12%, see Appendix.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
479

product annually. Given that these countries have grown at a compounded annual growth rate of 4% for the period
2002–2007, our ﬁxed-effects estimate implies that about 9.8% of the growth can be attributed to the high-speed internet
service and telecommunications industry (almost one-tenth of the annual growth).
As a matter of fact, it can be said that the ﬁxed-effects estimates are more reasonable. There are various studies that
point out the importance of the ICT technologies as a whole – not particularly for broadband – on economic growth that
ﬁnd almost the same or higher returns from the broadband investments. They are also similar to older studies relating the
returns from public infrastructure to the telephony network that can be considered a subset of the modern broadband
networks. As a general note, it appears that the resulting coefﬁcients are much smaller and their impact is found to be less
once simultaneities and ﬁxed effects are controlled for.
The discussion about the other three equations will be brief for the moment. The supply and output equations have
almost the same coefﬁcients and signiﬁcance. There is an important change in the supply equation and has to do with the
parameter of broadband price. It appears that broadband prices have a positive but much less important – in terms of the
size of the coefﬁcient – impact on the amounts invested in the telecommunications sector. The coefﬁcients in the demand
equation are generally different from those reported in the random effects model. The purchasing power coefﬁcient
becomes larger in the ﬁxed-effects model estimation and is now signiﬁcant. The once dominant broadband price variable
now becomes less signiﬁcant and its coefﬁcient shrinks even more. The second most important variable in this equation is
the education. It still remains positive and insigniﬁcant indicating a problematic behavior that can either be attributed to
the data or the particular variable used. Urbanization is negative and insigniﬁcant in this speciﬁcation. The research and
development variable becomes signiﬁcant and continues to have a positive sign. In other words the amounts invested in
R&D positively affect broadband participation. It is worth mentioning here that this variable represents all the research
funds in a country from private or public R&D and not those directed to ICT.
The last two columns of the Table 4 include the three-staged least squares (3SLS) estimates for the simultaneous
equations model. The reason for these estimates is ﬁrst to check whether there is a signiﬁcant misspeciﬁcation in the single
equations and second to provide some more precise estimates of the coefﬁcients. In order to check for the correctness of
the equations and their structure we need to compare the instrumental variable single equations results for each of the
random and ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcations. In terms of statistical signiﬁcance the random effects estimates are very
encouraging. One crucial difference is found in the labor force coefﬁcient which becomes insigniﬁcant in the ﬁxed-effects
full model estimation. In terms of coefﬁcients the values are also very similar. There is no observation that allows us to
point out a misspeciﬁcation in the system of equations. The ﬁxed country and time effects account for all other events or
elements that affected the results in the speciﬁc country clusters in each year. Therefore these estimates should be
considered more objective than the latter. Again in terms of statistical signiﬁcance the results seem to give the same
impression with the single equation estimates. One obvious change is related to the signiﬁcance of the research and
development expenditure which now becomes insigniﬁcant. All other changes are marginal. However, the coefﬁcients do
change in certain cases. Especially in the growth equation the non-ICT stock of capital and the education coefﬁcients seem
to dwindle to the half of their IV estimate and the broadband penetration estimate increases substantially. A more general
observation that spreads across all estimates has to do with the output equation. We can see that in the 3SLS speciﬁcation
the coefﬁcients for the relative importance of broadband investment against the difference in broadband penetration
shrink substantially in both random and ﬁxed-effects estimations. This might show that although the infrastructural
investments are crucial for the overall penetration their signiﬁcance drops when we account for other broadband
penetration promoting factors like the GDPC. The situation in Table 4 does allow for some discussion about the relative
strengths of the model. It is possible that there are certain limitations either based on the structure of each equation or the
dataset itself but there is not a clear reason to contradict its correctness.
6. Broadband critical mass
The public and private infrastructure discussion showed that investments in broadband technologies have different
network externalities from the transportation and utilities investments. They entail the important network effects and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 5
Country clustering according to penetration levels in 2007.
Low penetration (o20%)
Medium penetration (420% and o30%)
High penetration (430%)
Austria
Australia
Denmark
Greece
Belgium
Netherlands
Hungary
Canada
Norway
Ireland
France
Sweden
Italy
Germany
Switzerland
New Zealand
Japan
Portugal
Luxembourgh
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
480

positive externalities that spread way beyond the actual infrastructure itself. These effects include the applications that
derive from the utilization of the infrastructure and the participation of large chunks of the population. The levels of
participation largely affect the value of the network and deﬁne certain milestones in its evolution. These levels are not
clearly deﬁned by rigid thresholds but by areas of importance. An implication of network externalities is that the impact of
telecommunications and broadband infrastructure on growth will not be linear – thus resulting in larger than proportional
returns for certain broadband penetration levels. These levels, hereafter critical masses, allow us to estimate the increasing
returns whenever each of them is actually reached.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 6
Estimates of the IV and 3SLS regressions for the broadband penetration clusters.
Variables
IV GMM estimates
3SLS estimatesa
(1)
(2)
GDPb
Labor force
1.153***
0.742***
(5.89)
(6.11)
Non ICT stock of capital
0.098***
0.224**
(3.84)
(4.24)
–
–
BB penetration
Low
0.018***
0.008**
(3.62)
(2.26)
Medium
0.021***
0.014***
(3.27)
(3.00)
High
0.33***
0.023***
(3.74)
(3.62)
Constant
14.808***
18.499***
(7.98)
(17.20)
Penetration
GDPC
2.454***
2.436***
(3.25)
(3.23)
BB price
0.005***
0.005***
(6.64)
(6.67)
Education
0.925***
0.930***
(6.00)
(6.03)
R&D
0.001
0.004
(0.01)
(0.06)
Urbanization
0.031
0.031***
(0.51)
(6.03)
Constant
24.284**
24.112**
(2.33)
(2.32)
BB investment
BB price
0.001
0.001
(0.88)
(1.07)
Inter-platform
0.629**
0.601**
(2.33)
(2.28)
Regulation
0.370
0.336
(0.90)
(0.82)
Constant
24.312***
23.296***
(141.04)
(114.01)
DPenetration
BB investment
0.142
0.136
(1.15)
(1.11)
R2
(1)
(2)
Growth
0.86
0.99
Demand
0.85
0.94
Supply
0.98
0.98
Broadband output
0.29
0.92
Number of observations: 132.
(1) Fixed country and year effects using single equations IV estimates. Standard errors are clustered by country; the statistics are heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent; the kernel used for the AC and HEC covariance estimation is the Newey West (Bartlett).
(2) Fixed country and year effects using 3SLS GMM with robust standard errors. *10% signiﬁcance, **5% signiﬁcance, ***1% signiﬁcance (t-statistic).
a Three-staged least squares estimates with endogenous variables GDP, broadband penetration, broadband investment and difference in
penetration.
b Instruments used for the broadband penetration (growth equation): urbanization, research and development and broadband price.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
481

It is worth emphasizing that the initial model speciﬁcation does not allow for such controls. The primary intention was
to understand and estimate this effect of broadband penetration on aggregate output not the reverse relationship. The
rationale followed the idea of distinguishing those effects from each other so that the simultaneity bias would be avoided.
Nevertheless the ﬁnal goal is to evaluate the one-way relationship pointed out in the aggregate production equation.
Arguably the externalities of the telecommunications networks are primarily responsible for the nonlinearities or the
technological diffusion that is taking place at the same time in the broad ICT industry. In order to test for the existence of
certain nonlinearities in our model we have to introduce some structural changes in the equations. What we want to
capture is the level that these changes happen and to get some idea about the extent of this change. Hence our results
about these externalities are only suggestive. The following modiﬁcation in the aggregate production equation will allow us
to measure the previously mentioned phenomenon. Eq. (1) becomes
logðGDPitÞ ¼ a0 þ a1 logðKitÞ þ a2 logðLFitÞ þ ða3LOW þ a4MEDIUM þ a5HIGHÞ logðPENitÞ þ 1
it
(9)
The three dummy variables introduced, LOW, MEDIUM and HIGH, correspond to a low, medium and high
penetration level, respectively. The countries that experience the low, medium and high penetration levels are
deﬁned in Table 5. In particular, 41% of the countries in the dataset have a medium penetration level and almost 23% of
them have high penetration. The remaining 36% is classiﬁed as low penetration. The threshold below 20% is used
for the low penetration level, between 20% and 30% is used for the medium broadband penetration and the threshold of
more than 30% for the high.14 We note here that penetrations reaching more than 50% of the population are not
yet experienced which translates into one broadband connection per house (with an average of two people leaving in a
house). This idea takes into account the sharing of the same line by more than one person, which is apparent in land line
telephony as well.
Eq. (9) allows for country and time ﬁxed effects. We are mainly interested in the signiﬁcance and relative magnitude of
the three coefﬁcients of penetration (a3, a4, a5). It is important to mention that most countries have actually climbed from
medium to high penetration or from low to medium penetration levels. This effect is time sensitive, and the introduction of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 7
Percentage of impact of broadband infrastructure on growth for each country.
Average GDP
growth
Average % impact of broadband
infrastructure on GDP
Percentage of country’s growth
attributed to broadband infrastructure
BB penetration 430%
Denmark
2.11
0.38
18.15
Netherlands
2.03
0.39
19.03
Switzerland
2.06
0.39
18.95
Norway
2.79
0.41
14.59
Sweden
3.1
0.37
11.80
BB penetration o30% and 420%
Germany
1.44
0.24
16.86
France
1.89
0.26
13.49
Japan
2.07
0.20
9.77
Belgium
2.19
0.21
9.55
United Kingdom
2.72
0.26
9.53
Australia
3.44
0.27
7.75
United States
2.95
0.20
6.92
Canada
2.71
0.19
6.87
Luxembourgh
3.92
0.27
6.81
BB penetration o20%
Portugal
0.85
0.14
16.04
Italy
0.94
0.15
15.89
New Zealand
2.88
0.15
5.33
Austria
2.42
0.12
4.94
Hungary
3.65
0.15
4.09
Spain
3.49
0.14
3.91
Greece
4.33
0.16
3.68
Ireland
5.02
0.16
3.13
Average
22 country average
2.67
0.24
10.54
14 It is worth stating that the penetration levels are deﬁned by the 2006 year data. This means that if some countries reach the medium-level
penetration in 2006 then they are included in the medium penetration cluster—no matter what the initial penetration levels were (in the previous years).
This is because the levels themselves do affect the returns. Of course countries that have been in the medium or high penetration cluster for all years are
expected to have higher returns than those migrating to the higher levels during the years.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
482

the time ﬁxed effects absorbs some of the change, which would overestimate the coefﬁcients of the separate penetration
levels.
The estimation results for the new system of equations, which in turn results in two new models, are given in Table 6.
We are only estimating ﬁxed effects for these models since we believe in the results that account for the time and country
speciﬁcities.
The
ﬁrst
column
includes
the
single
equation
IV
results
that
account
for
autocorrelation
and
hetreroscedasticity. Most of the estimates remain unchanged and thus we are not going to discuss them again. The
most signiﬁcant change is found in the demand equation where the urbanization coefﬁcient becomes signiﬁcant for the
3SLS estimation.
We focus our attention on the 3SLS coefﬁcients which should be considered more precise. Turning into the reported
parameters we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient for the low penetration rate is around 0.008. This could show the effect of
broadband penetration for low-level countries, which, according to Eq. (5), is 0.15%. The signiﬁcance is high (t-statistic of
2.26) thus indicating the effects are in place for these levels of penetration.
The next coefﬁcient corresponds to the medium penetration level. The t-statistic is signiﬁcant at the 1% level (3.00),
indicating again stronger effects achieved for countries between the penetration thresholds of 20% and 30%. The parameter
is also low and equal to 0.014, which translates into a low added value on top of what can be achieved by low penetration
countries. The corresponding effect is 0.23%. We can see a clear difference between low and medium penetration
countries here. For the high-level penetration coefﬁcient we ﬁnd a high value both in terms of magnitude and signiﬁcance.
The new value is equal to 0.023 and a t-statistic of 3.62, indicating strong effects. This effect unveils the importance
of the 30% threshold. This indication is supported by the fact that in the dataset some countries only marginally achieved it.
The 30%-penetration rate tells us that more than 50% of the population has access to the network. This yields an important
effect on top of what the actual network can achieve. It also indicates the existence of the aforementioned externalities
and supports the concept of critical mass. It indirectly creates a vision for countries to achieve these goals and capitalize
the beneﬁcial effects that the network can provide. It also implies a 0.39% aggregate growth rate due to broadband
externalities.
According to the estimates from the relative penetration levels from Table 6 we can assemble the estimated returns
from the investments in broadband infrastructure in each country for the period 2002–2007. These estimates are less
generic since they take into account only country and time ﬁxed-effects estimates and account for the scalable beneﬁts
earned through the various penetration levels. Table 7 summarizes these estimates. Finally, Fig. 2 shows the broadband
beneﬁt on growth from the countries in the sample relatively to their actual GDP growth for the period 2002–2007.
7. Conclusion
The focus of this paper is on the effects of broadband infrastructure on total country growth. Because of the bidirectional
relationship of growth and infrastructure I used a simultaneous equations model. Previous literature has so far only
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 2. GDP growth rate and the relative returns on growth based on the broadband infrastructure.
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
483

examined this relationship for telephony networks (Roeller and Waverman, 2001). This work adds to this emerging
ﬁeld by incorporating a simultaneous approach methodology that endogenises supply, demand and output and
provides measurable estimates for impact of the broadband network externalities for the OECD countries between 2002
and 2007.
The results suggest that there are increasing returns to broadband telecommunications investments, which are
consistent with the persistence of network effects. What has been seen is that there is evidence of a critical mass
phenomenon in broadband infrastructure investments. The level that has been identiﬁed as critical is the 30%, which
effectively translates in half of the population having access to a broadband connection. The econometric speciﬁcation
showed that these effects exist in the Scandinavian countries, which enjoy higher returns from their increased
participation.
The limitations of this study are mainly related to data availability. The rapid spread of broadband technologies
in the recent past has not yet allowed for wide availability of microlevel qualitative data that focus on different
aspects of the technology. For example, there is little information about broadband usage and the types of services that
customers choose more frequently based on their socio-economic background. On the theoretical part the level of
infrastructure that is required in order to achieve a critical mass cannot always be the same for every country. Perhaps
wealthier and more urbanized countries beneﬁt faster from the broadband services because of the economies of scale of
the networks.
This study acts as a starting point for the macroeconomic impact of fast network access technologies on
economic growth. An interesting future study could use data from a global dataset including countries in different
growth phases from the OECD core. Richer information and descriptive variables could be incorporated like the way
each individual sector beneﬁts from the usage of different broadband platforms and the ways the spillovers are handled
and realized.
Acknowledgements
I thank Tommaso Valletti, Leonard Waverman, Robert MacCulloch and Christos Genakos for valuable comments. I also
thank the International Telecommunication Society for the honor of the ‘Best Paper Award’ in the 17th biennial ITS
conference in Montreal, Canada, June 2008.
Appendix
See Table A1.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table A1
Compound annual Growth rates for GDP per Capita, Broadband Price and Broadband Penetration (constant 2000 prices).
GDP ($ m) CAGR%
(2002–2007)
BB price 1 Mbps ($) CAGR%
(2002–2007)
Broadband penetration (%)
CAGR% (2002–2007)
Australia
3.44
47.47
77.26
Austria
2.42
29.03
27.73
Belgium
2.19
21.40
26.50
Canada
2.71
47.47
19.69
Denmark
2.11
50.15
33.96
France
1.89
47.47
55.58
Germany
1.44
43.26
44.00
Greece
4.33
42.07
290.58
Hungary
3.65
57.15
68.76
Ireland
5.02
41.56
126.84
Italy
0.94
57.15
65.65
Japan
2.07
58.71
25.00
Luxembourg
3.92
40.00
79.06
Netherlands
2.03
56.27
35.90
New Zealand
2.88
40.00
82.38
Norway
2.79
45.07
46.47
Portugal
0.85
46.35
43.28
Spain
3.49
41.32
42.44
Sweden
3.10
46.35
29.46
Switzerland
2.06
45.07
38.45
United Kingdom
2.72
45.07
61.94
United States
2.95
50.41
25.80
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
484

References
Aaron, H. J. (1990). Discussion of ‘‘Why is Infrastructure Important?’’. In Alicia H. Munnell (Ed.), Is there a shortfall in public capital investment? Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series, no. 34 (pp. 51–63).
Abramovitz, M. (1986). Catching up, forging ahead, and falling behind. The Journal of Economic History, 46(2), 385–406.
Aschauer, D. A. (1989). Is public expenditure productive? Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(2), 177–200.
Barro, R. J., & Sala-i-Martin, X. (2003). Economic growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Briscoe, B., Odlyzko, A., & Tilly, B. (2006). Metcalfe’s law is wrong. IEEE Spectrume, July, 26–31
Cronin, F. J., Parker, E. B., Colleran, E. K., & Gold, M. A. (1991). Telecommunications infrastructure and economic growth. An analysis of causality.
Telecommunications Policy, 15(6), 529–535.
Datta, A., & Agarwal, S. (2004). Telecommunications and economic growth: A panel data approach. Applied Economics, 36(15), 1649–1654.
Duggal, V., Saltzman, C., & Klein, L. (2007). Infrastructure and productivity: An extension to private infrastructure and IT productivity. Journal of
Econometrics, 140(2), 485–502.
Eberts, R. W., & Fogarty, S. M. (1987). Estimating the relationship between local public and private investment. Working Paper No. 8703, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland.
Fisher, F. M. (1969). The existence of aggregate production functions. Econometrica, 37(4), 553–577.
Gramlich, E. M. (1994). Infrastructure investment: A review essay. Journal of Economic Literature, 32(3), 1176–1196.
Greenstein, S. M., & McDevitt, R. C. (2009). The Broadband Bonus: Accounting for Broadband Internet’s Impact on U.S. GDP, Working Paper.
Greenstein, S. M., & Spiller, P. T. (1995). Modern telecommunications infrastructure and economic activity: An empirical investigation. Industrial and
Corporate Change, 4(4), 647–665.
Hardy,, A. (1980). The role of the telephone in economic development. Telecommunications Policy, 4(4), 278–286.
Hulten, C., & Schwab, R. (1984). Regional productivity growth in US manufacturing: 1951–78. American Economic Review, 74, 152–162.
Jorgenson, D. W. (1991). Fragile statistical foundations: The macroeconomics of public infrastructure investment. Paper presented at the 1991 American
Enterprise Institute Conference: ‘‘Infrastructure Needs and Policy Options for the 1990s,’’ Washington, DC.
Kendrick, J. W. (1956). Productivity trends: Capital and labor. Review of Economics and Statistics, 38, 248–257.
Leff, N. H. (1984). Externalities, information costs and social beneﬁt–cost analysis for economic development: An example from telecommunications.
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 32(2), 255–276.
Lehr, W., Gillett, S., Osorio, C., & Sirbu, M. (2006). Measuring broadband’s economic impact. Broadband Properties, 12–24.
Madden, G., & Savage, S. (1998). CEE telecommunications investment and economic growth. Information Economics and Policy, 10(2), 173–195.
Madden, G., & Savage, S. (2000). Telecommunications and economic growth. International Journal of Social Economics, 27(7), 893–906.
Mankiw, N. G., Romer, D., & Weil, D. N. (1992). A contribution to the empirics of economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), 407–437.
Metcalfe, B. (1995). Metcalfe’s law: A network becomes more valuable as it reaches more users. Infoworld, 17(40), 53.
Munnell, A. H. (1992). Policy watch: Infrastructure investment and economic growth. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6(4), 189–198.
Reed, D. P. (1999). Weapon of math destruction: A simple formula explains why the Internet is wreaking havoc on business models. Context Magazine,
Spring.
Roeller, L. H., & Waverman, L. (2001). Telecommunications infrastructure and economic development: A simultaneous approach. The American Economic
Review, 91(4), 909–923.
Romer, Paul M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. The Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 71–102.
Rosenberg, N. (1972). Technology and American economic growth. New York: Harper & Row.
Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical change and the aggregate production function. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3), 312–320.
Sridhar, K. S., & Sridhar, V. (2004). Telecommunications infrastructure and economic growth: Evidence from developing countries. Working Papers, 04/14,
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy.
Tatom, J. A. (1991). Public capital and private sector performance. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 73, 3–15.
Wooldridge, W. M. (2001). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
P. Koutroumpis / Telecommunications Policy 33 (2009) 471–485
485

